This episode is sponsored by Audible.
With each New Year we celebrate the forward
march of time, and for some civilizations
that march may already been a very long one.
So today’s episode makes the start of our
seventh season here on Science & Futurism
with Isaac Arthur, and I am your aforementioned
host, Isaac Arthur.
Way back in our second season, when we first
started doing weekly episodes, we had an episode
called Civilizations at the End of Time: Black
Hole Farming, which was long our most popular
episode until being passed by its sequel,
Iron Stars.
The End of Time series is one of our most
popular series on the show and looks at how
civilization can survive the death of worlds
and stars, the encroach of entropy, and last
till time ends or at least has no meaning.
This is an important concept, of which our
current understanding in cosmology leaves
a lot to be desired.
There is no End of Time per se, just a point
where things have run down so much you couldn’t
even find the energy, or raw materials, to
build a clock or calendar, let alone support
anyone who would have a use for such a thing,
and that series looked at ways to push that
back and keep civilization going far longer
than we’d expect.
The beginning of time is quite a different
story, as we currently assume it has a definitive
Time “t equals zero” at the Big Bang.
That’s debatable too, and there’s a lot
of theories about what the state of the Universe
was before that, if such a concept as ‘before’
can even mean anything, or if there might
have been a Universe before that event, but
it's generally accepted that nothing was alive
and kicking here when it happened, since that
event was so energy intense, hot, and dense
that it made the fiery cores of stars or supernovae
look calm, cool, and sedate.
On that same note though, late-Universe civilizations
would regard our current era as so short and
hot and dense that the period of star formation
would simply seem like part of the big bang
too, so we will play with that notion a bit
today and ask if life could have developed
or existed even in those minutes right after
the Big Bang, or might have in Big Bangs in
other Universes.
Though we will principally ask today what
is the earliest period in which biological
life might have formed.
We will also ask about some big questions,
such as might folks have survived an earlier
Universe and migrated here, or even made this
Universe as their new home or at least their
legacy, and might we survive our Universe’s
eventual death by doing the same.
One key point we focused on in Civilizations
at the End of Time that applies equally well
to the beginning of time, is that the basic
mechanisms of biology and cognition will operate
on timescales depending on the rate at which
the switches fire and flip.
For example, our neurons fire about 200 times
a second, so the basic scale of human thought
and our ability to perceive events is in the
millisecond range.
If you live in a nearly dead Universe of hyper-cold
and hyper-efficient computing, you can support
a whole civilization on a light bulb instead
of a star by just running it very slowly.
The analog of neurons firing might occur on
the order of millions of years, so a thinking
process might last for trillions of trillions
of trillions of years.
The converse is very likely true, that early
in the Universe, when the energy density was
high and ambient entropy was much lower, life
of the era might have been based on sub-atomic
scale interactions taking place in trillionths
of a second or even less, resulting in an
epoch of the Universe lasting literally only
an eyeblink to us but permitting some mind
built upon that scale to have experienced
what we could only experience in eons.
If such life or civilizations ever existed,
they could only have lasted in that form for
as long as the universe was hot enough, dense
enough, and low enough in entropy for them.
If they did endure and adapt to the rapidly
cooling universe, the adaptation would be
so extreme they’d be unrecognizable from
their original forms—much like for example
an originally human civilization adapting
to conditions at the end of time, as post-biological
life.
We’ll return later to contemplating the
very earliest things that might have qualified
as life, but for now let’s contemplate how
early in the universe biological life as we
know it might have begun.
We can rule out the first 300,000 years of
the Universe easily enough, which is handy
because that’s a period we cannot see, the
time prior to what we call “The Last Scattering”,
and indeed the reason we cannot see it is
the same reason we could not have had biology
then.
Back then the Universe hadn’t expanded very
much – though by this we mean our Observable
Universe, a point that will matter later too.
Since the Universe was quite small it was
also ultra-hot and ultra-dense, so there was
no complex chemistry going on.
Prior to the Last Scattering you could not
even have a water molecule, or any carbon-based
molecules, because the Universe was hotter
than the surface of a Sun still, indeed it
was too hot for atoms to even form.
Once it spread out enough that atoms could
form, and photons being radiated by all that
heat became more likely than not to fly through
empty space rather than scatter off that early
matter.
Before The Last Scattering, the universe was
filled with hot matter emitting photons, but
as is the case inside a star, those photons
were almost immediately absorbed and re-emitted
over and over by surrounding matter.
At The Last Scattering things cooled and thinned
enough that most photons being emitted wandered
around without hitting anything and continued
to do so.
We can see those early photons to this day,
as they are still arriving hither and thither
throughout the Universe and will always do
so, just ever more weak and red-shifted, nowadays
they are red-shifted down to microwaves and
form a constant background radiation in the
cosmos, what we call Cosmic Microwave Background
radiation or CMB, a Universe wide phenomena.
From a time and space sense it is a wall we
cannot see beyond, or before, but there were
no civilizations there to see because there
were no atoms and molecules to build them
out of.
So no carbon-based or water-based life, nor
options like Silicon Semiconductor Life or
any of the other alternative forms of Chemistry
we contemplated in our episode Non-Carbon
Based Life.
It was just too hot and dense for such things
to exist.
There also weren’t the right types of atoms.
Our Universe is mostly dark matter and has
been since its inception, but dark matter
is not a good candidate for life, especially
fast forming and acting life, so we’ll skip
it today.
Most of the early mundane matter wasn’t
a good candidate either, the Big Bang and
its immediate follow up would see the formation
of just hydrogen, helium, and lithium, and
very little of the last, indeed we seem to
have even less of it than our models predict,
what is called the Cosmological Lithium Problem
or Lithium Discrepancy.
Given that our models are off on that, it
is possible some of the heavier elements also
formed in very tiny quantities too, and potentially
in ways and fashions that might have seen
them getting concentrated in some spots.
It is the nature of heavier element formation
that it tends to happen in clumps and clumps
of high density and energy.
Highly unlikely but maybe not impossible,
and by about 10-20 millions years after the
Big Bang the whole Universe had cooled to
the point of being room temperature and you’ll
sometimes hear me or others call this the
Bathwater Epoch, as it's vaguely conceivable
you might have had enough oxygen around in
some places to form large pockets of warm
water in which very tiny amounts of heavier
atoms might concentrate and permit some chemistry
and thus life.
Though I’d emphasize that this is one of
those things that’s possible only in the
sense that we can’t flat out say it is impossible
that this might have happened somewhere in
the vast Universe.
It's also one of those possible primordial
events in other Universes.
The conditions of our Universe were likely
very dependent on the tiniest variations in
certain physical constants and one in which
if the formation of heavier elements in the
Big Bang, Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, were even
a little more preferred could have resulted
in such a Universe having trillions of muddy
warm water worlds form in an Early and Warm
Universe, and if expansion was a bit slower
there, they might persist for eons and permit
evolution.
For us, even if life did miraculously form
then, it would probably have frozen soon after
and at best potentially been revived or survived
by proximity to one of the first stars forming
millions of years after the Bathwater Epoch,
then perhaps been blown about the galaxy by
the detonation of that star, and world, in
those first Supernovae that gave us real quantities
of heavier elements.
There was a long time period between the Bathwater
Epoch and Star Formation, but large clumps
of matter like planets take parallel times
to cool down so you might have had a remnant
of life in some giant ice ball near its still
warm core, and keeping life around to the
start of Star Formation.
That is generally thought nowadays to be at
about 250 million years after the Big Bang,
and we revised that figure down from more
like half a billion to a billion in recent
years.
250 Million years is still a long time, but
is only about 2% of the age of the current
Universe.
If we’re thinking of all the Age of the
Current Universe as a single day starting
at midnight, and now as that second midnight,
then Last Scattering event was about 2 seconds
into the day, the Bathwater Epoch between
minutes 1 and 2, the first star formation
about half an hour into the day, the formation
of Earth and Primordial Earth Life around
supper time, the invention of fire a handful
of seconds ago, and the dawn of recorded history
less than an eyeblink ago.
So needless to say if any civilization arose
around those early stars, or the second generation
after supernovae, let alone the Bathwater
Epoch, they’d have had one heck of a head
start on us.
Based on what we know though, when could our
style of Biology have developed?
Well that’s a tricky question because it's
all about probabilities and we don’t know
what the odds are.
We can assume there’s a decent chance in
all the Grand Universe of billions of billions
of stars that a few freak rocky planets formed
early on.
Potentially inside that first billion years
of the Universe.
We often say that it took a lot of supernovae
to get us all the rocky material we have now,
but that’s not entirely true.
Supernova send out dense waves of heavy matter,
many generations of them do seed an area with
lots of heavier elements to make high-metallicity
stars common and rocky planets plausible,
but generally the heavier elements in your
local neighborhood will come from one specific
supernova, not a whole ton of them slowly
raising the galactic average.
Which they do, but it is entirely plausible
a single supernova could result in a rocky
planet, though with a narrower range of elemental
distribution, as not all heavy elements are
produced by exploding stars nor does each
exploding star produce the same ratios of
elements.
Plus star formation tends to occur in clumps,
meaning supernovae do too, so wouldn’t take
that many stretches of probability to create
a solar system like our own inside that first
billion years of the Universe, maybe even
the first half a billion.
We don’t know for certain that life needs
a rocky earth-like planet to form on, but
that is where we know life has formed and
where we expect to find it.
We have plenty of examples of high-metallicity
stars, where we’d expect to find high-metal
planets like our own, that are more than twice
as old as our sun.
They’re not common, but not ultra-rare either.
And that’s the thing about that first case
of life, as we examined in our episode Fermi
Paradox: Firstborn.
The early universe was not very fertile for
forming life-bearing planets but it becomes
more fertile as it ages.
So the first life bearing planet, whichever
planet that was, was almost certainly very
atypical of planets that existed in its time.
It was a first of its kind, formed when the
universe was only just beginning to produce
planets of that kind and produced them only
rarely.
When pondering the Fermi Paradox--the big
question of why we haven’t found any alien
life yet when the universe appears so old,
immense, and fertile--we have to not only
consider that the firstborn life in the Universe
was probably a statistical fluke for its time,
but that we might be that lonely fluke.
We do not know that the development of life
as we know it is even vaguely probable.
We have some theories saying so, however most
of those begin from the assumption that it
is probably natural and work from that, which
is a good approach but also logically dubious.
One critical notion in considering the emergence
of biological civilization is that they follow
Darwinian Evolution, from primordial goo to
building spaceships, and that they not only
do that but do that on something like our
timescale.
But the timescale of Earth-life has a lot
more to do with the speed of cellular reproductive
processes than basic organic chemistry, from
which it is an emergent property, and we can’t
even take for granted that other life runs
on organic chemistry.
If proto-life in some other incarnation elsewhere
in the Universe ran on a slightly different
approach that resulted in generations taking
ten times as long or a tenth as long, those
are likely to be magnified in speeding or
slowing the progress of life, but even if
they weren’t, it might mean most worlds
see their star burn out before life even gets
multicellular, or the reverse, that it can
spring up so fast to complexity that they’re
building spaceships only a few million years
after their oceans cooled enough to allow
a primordial soup to form.
If some life formed as a naturally occurring
semiconductor or superconductor vein on some
planet, how fast does it experience time?
Hypothetically you could have rafts of mostly
silicon floating on planets still boiling
as magma from their formation mere millions
of years after the first giant star exploded
to scatter that silicon, and such stars themselves
don’t live long either.
If the first stars formed 250 million years
into the Universe, the first and biggest of
them would have detonated and scattered plenty
of silicon and other heavy elements only a
few million years later.
But this notion of life not even working in
a conventional biological sense, but being
more like a naturally occurring computer,
reminds us that you do not necessarily need
silicon for computers either, heck our first
ones worked on vacuum tubes anyway.
If you can arrange for matter to make a switch,
a simple on and off under some stimuli, then
you create the most basic element for potential
life.
You can do that mechanically, biologically,
with a transistor or a vacuum tube, heck you
can even do it with black holes.
It doesn’t necessarily have to run on what
we think of as normal chemistry, or even normal
matter.
And if it doesn’t, that gives us some other
options independent of the universe aging
enough to cool down for chemistry to be possible
and for dying stars to give us some new atoms
and chemicals to add to the mix.
As an example, I mentioned earlier that when
we talk about the Universe and Big Bang, as
some point-like event from which everything
emerged, we just mean our Observable Universe.
I’m not even talking about other universes
or realities here, we only know the parts
we can see emerged from something much smaller
– we speculate it was point like though
there’s some debate on that, as well as
what we mean by that.
That does not necessarily mean the Big Bang
or our universe started from a single point
though.
It’s entirely possible the primordial Universe
was infinite in size already, and has simply
continued to expand, and the chunk of it we
can see now just used to be smaller and since
expanded as did the rest of it.
It’s also worth remembering the Observable
Universe isn’t a set size either, and I
don’t mean in the sense that the stuff in
it is expanding.
If you’re taking mass measurements or galaxy
counts as the Universe ages you’ll see both
dropping, because while we can see further
and further every instant as light reaches
us from further places in the Universe, our
‘edge’ to the observable Universe is the
place at which space in between us and it
is expanding faster than the light from it
can cover the distance.
The Observable Universe a billion years ago
was a smaller one, but also a more massive
one, a good deal more crowded, and vastly
so in the Early Universe.
Now the Universe is not homogenous and evenly
distributed.
Even beyond local space like planets and stars
you have got galaxies and superclusters and
so on, and it's been like that since its inception,
the source of some puzzlement and reason for
theories like Cosmic Inflation in the first
instants after the Big Bang, but at big enough
scales features break down and everything
looks like noise and static, what we call
the End of Greatness.
The resolution, or pixel size of the Universe
in this sense, is around 300 million light
years.
If we divide the Universe into 300 million
light year pockets or 3D pixels or voxels,
the Observable Universe would be composed
of a few million of these pockets.
They’re not identical, anymore than snowflakes
are, but there’s nothing of significance
and structure to distinguish them.
They were smaller in the past, much smaller,
again we believe non-homogenous distribution
of the Universe occurred from the tiniest
instant of time after the Big Bang, but assuming
the Universe doesn’t magically end right
at the boundary of what we can currently see,
there would have been a lot more of these
pixels in the early Universe.
Let’s assume in those earliest moments that
each such region represented something like
a switch, or neuron, of which there were many
billions, or trillions, or even an infinite
number, and many close enough to interact.
Something like a Universe-brain, that’s
a very wasteful approach to computing, where
you’re using something in galactic mass
scales just to flip a bit, but it’s not
entirely impossible that those little fluctuations
in spacetime in that early cosmic inflation
resulted in something like a Boltzmann Brain
thinking at incredible speeds and able to
exist at those earlier insane temperatures
and timescales because it’s not running
on matter.
It presumably would have been torn apart in
short order, but again it's not raw time in
terms of seconds or years that matter but
raw processing or events, switch flipping,
that controls time in terms of thought and
personal existence.
Incidentally, as immense as the scale involved
is, this is not indicative of a god-like intelligence,
again the implication is it needs whole galaxies
to be a single switch in the computer, in
an infinite or big enough Universe that might
be God-like but in terms of IQ per unit of
mass, as it were, it would be ridiculously
stupid.
Alternatively, perhaps it was super smart
- smart enough to run simulations of the fate
of the universe in the distant future - our
present.
This would seem to be the earliest possible
version of the simulation hypothesis.
See The Simulation Hypothesis episode for
more on that subject.
In this Universe anyway, play around with
the initial physical constants and you could
get a Boltzmann Brain of breathtaking scope
emerging out of a Big Bang, see our Boltzmann
Brain episode for discussion of these freak-coincidence
sorts of minds.
But since we’re talking about other Universes,
let’s talk about folks migrating into this
one as a source for early life.
Now how they would do that, and from whence
they came, we’ll consider academic for now,
as we have no idea, but let's say they were
reasonably like us coming from a Universe
with similar basic laws only older and they
found a way to make the trip.
How old does a Universe need to be to migrate
to it successfully?
You might assume you could start moving in
as soon as the first stars formed but this
is probably wrong in both directions.
If you’re looking for planets and raw materials
heavier than hydrogen and helium, you’d
best wait a while, but you probably don’t
need stars or heavier elements at this point.
Odds are if it’s possible to make fusion
work profitability as a power source in something
significantly smaller than a star we’ll
figure it out in the next century or two,
and if you can do that then a Universe of
raw hydrogen is one in which you can gather
fuel to run your reactors, and fusion is called
that because it fuses lighter elements into
heavier ones the same as stars do, so you
could get your heavier elements that way as
a waste product or by running tons of supercolliders.
So odds are even we, in a century or two,
could make a go at colonizing a Universe still
too young to have stars in it, let alone some
species thinking about making or traveling
to other Universes, as most of our theoretical
models that conceive of such things do that
through playing with blackholes, wormholes,
or similar concepts that tend to all make
for methods of power and matter creation better
than regular old fusion.
Indeed that is one of the better Fermi Paradox
Solutions, that civilizations don’t colonize
galaxies because they figure out how to travel
to other Universes even before their earliest
sub-light colony ships could get to another
star system and set up shop.
It is decently plausible we’ll have figured
out all the laws of physics before we’ve
reached other stars and if those laws open
the door to bigger and better options than
slow galactic colonization we probably would
do that instead and could surmise other older
alien civilizations did so too, and such being
the case we never hear from them.
Indeed such being the case we might be in
some remote pocket of a Universe they triggered
into existence and began colonizing.
We may be an infestation, or at best squatters,
in their universe.
It’s a lot easier to colonize a young Universe,
everything is closer together so you can reach
it faster and can reach more of it too, getting
ships to places we could never go now because
of Cosmic Expansion.
The Amount of Universe you can colonize depends
on how soon you can send your ships out and
how fast they can go, because the Universe
is running away from you and the further bits
are running the fastest, presumably faster
than light beyond the Cosmological Event Horizon.
If they have fusion, or better, they don’t
need to wait for stars to form.
Now the Universe was still a warm place back
when those earliest stars formed, though again
that period was already more than a ten times
longer after the Big Bang than the end of
the Bathwater Epoch, when the whole Universe’s
average temperature was what we’d consider
comfortable.
So that might be the period you’d choose
to enter, during the Bathwater Epoch or after
but before the earliest stars.
The game of life, and being first, is very
different when we assume the first entrant
already has technology from the outset rather
than needing to evolve.
That’s why Boltzmann Brains – absurdly
improbable random collections of matter that
come together to become a thinking entity
rather than the slow crawl up Darwin’s Ladder
to it, always have the edge on being the first
thinking creature, ignoring that we tend to
estimate that they are considerably less likely
than not to pop into existence even once in
an entire Universe our age.
Other Universes with other probabilities might
have better odds for them, and if our Universe
really is infinite then the first thinking
life form was definitely a Boltzmann Brain.
In our current scenario though life immigrated,
so could have evolved elsewhere, but pops
into our Universe with all its technology
available.
How early they could safely arrive and get
started colonizing depends a lot on their
technology.
It is hard to run matter-based technology
in a hot place, we discussed how to do that
in our Episode Colonizing the Sun but there
at least we had the option of using the rest
of space as a cold reservoir.
300,000 years into the Universe everything
was as dense as the Sun and hot as the Sun’s
surface but there was no cold reservoir.
So unless your technology encompasses options
for bending or breaking the laws of Thermodynamics
you probably need to wait till after this
period to send in your ships, even if your
civilization isn’t biological anymore.
But you probably could be in there as early
as a million years if it was post-biological,
and in the Bathwater Epoch, or a bit before
or after, if it was biological.
Especially given that you need to make all
your heavy elements which is a very energy
and heat intensive process and so it's kind
of like trying to work in a smelting facility
someone decided to place in the middle of
a hot jungle, you’re producing huge amounts
of heat in a place that’s already uncomfortably
warm.
So that’s probably the soonest you’d move
in, several million if not tens of millions
of years after some Universes Big Bang.
Now mind you, with different physical constants
a Universe might expand and cool faster, but
in such a Universe you have a harder time
colonizing and are more limited in what you
can colonize as the Universe would expand
out faster and remove more of it from play.
Assuming a civilization is creating it and
can pick their constants, or its equivalent
in being able to flip their portal to new
Universes until they find one with the constants
they want, more or less, then there’s actually
a fairly narrow range of good picks.
You do want one expanding as non-expanding
Universes are a death sentence, even if we
assumed one that would expand only to about
our current density then start contracting
or stabilize, though a fairly long death sentence
in that case, but anything resulting in stuff
being much closer together and staying that
way would tend to result in you eventually
baking in the waste heat of all your stars,
a conundrum we get from Olber’s Paradox
which we may discuss some other time.
If you have it expanding much slower than
ours, or to much higher density than ours,
you’ve got big heat issues to deal with
down the road and also have to wait longer
to colonize it.
If you pick for much faster expansion, you
can colonize sooner but get less material
available, and if it's more than a tiny bit
quicker you probably never even get galaxy
formation.
Which isn’t a problem if you don’t use
stars for power or planets for living on,
but you still need to collect your hydrogen
gas for fusing and without expansion slow
enough to allow matter to clump into galaxies
and the like, you are doing your collecting
in a place with a gas density similar to intergalactic
space.
It might be initially denser but if it's expanding
faster, eventually it will end up way less
dense than even our intergalactic space is.
You might not care about that either, if you
can pop into some Universe for your goldilocks
period, not too hot, not too cold, not too
dense, not too thin, then you can presumably
repeat the effort after some millions or billions
of years, migrating to a new Universe.
And you might be running on a clock too.
Making a pocket Universe in science fiction
tends to show us time running quickly there,
so that we get billions of years unfolding
in mere days, but there’s no reason to assume
time would run faster in some Universe you
spawned via induced Big Bang or hunted out
of the Multiverse for travel too.
Indeed there’s a lot of issues with trying
to move to some place where the time isn’t
running at about the same speed.
As an example you might step through your
portal to where the time goes a million times
faster and just be torn apart by tidal effects.
So if you have to wait to go there at the
same time in your own Universe, getting in
early is nice, and you might like faster expanding
Universes, and just leave them for new ones
if they thinned out too much.
This probably counter-indicates our own Universe
being such a thing though because our Cosmological
Expansion appears to be accelerating, and
you’d probably want the reverse, fast initial
expansion dropping to a crawl, but there’s
some big assumptions in there of course.
Also, you would expect such a Universe to
be thoroughly colonized by now, with a 13
billion year head start.
The Fermi Paradox is already problematic enough
normally when we just assume aliens might
have a couple billion year head start from
having evolved on a younger world than us.
On the other hand, if you emerge into a Universe,
even getting into it earlier during that Bathwater
Epoch, if you haven’t got faster than light
travel it's already too late to colonize it
all, and you would have big pockets of space,
like our own Observable Universe, that couldn’t
even see your civilization and vice versa,
so maybe we are in some Universe someone already
colonized from nearly the beginning of time,
and if it were possible for them to migrate
Universes, it’s possible for us to as well,
which might be one way we could escape ever
having to be a Civilization at the End of
Time.
We’ll be getting to our Audiobook of the
Month in just a moment but folks sometimes
ask about the music we use, and it comes from
a wide range of sources but some of you might
have recognized today’s selection as coming
from Stellardrone, who I happened to be listening
to while writing the episode and thought it
would make a good musical accompaniment for
today, and I’ll link his work in the episode
description as we usually do for the musicians
and composers kind enough to lend us their
work if you want to find some more of it.
I may have been influenced by the music I
was listening to but the episode was inspired
by countless science fiction stories of ancient
civilizations or those predating even the
Universe itself, or trying to flee to another
Universe, and both are themes in Stephen Baxter’s
famous Xeelee Sequence, the first novel of
which, “Raft” features future humans trying
to survive after traveling to an alternate
universe with different physical constants,
something we discussed today.
Raft is Baxter’s debut Novel, and begins
his reputation for being not only one of the
most imaginative science fiction authors of
modern times, but also one who sticks to hard
science wherever possible, and in spite of
this his Xeelee Sequence is one that spans
eons of time and the breadth of the Universe
while also conveying how enormous both truly
are, and for this reason Raft is our January
2021 Audible Audiobook of the Month.
If you would like to try out Raft, you can
find that audiobook, along with the many other
excellents stories by Stephen Baxter, over
at Audible.
They also have podcasts, guided-wellness programs,
theatrical performances, and exclusive audible
originals, indeed they have over three centuries
worth of audio if you just hit the play button
and ran it through every title.
If you want access to that massive collection
of great audiobooks, like “Raft”, you
can join Audible for a 30-day free trial,
and Audible members not only get discounts
on any audiobooks they buy, but a free book
every month, with a Premium Plus Membership.
Additionally, they are now giving unlimited
access to their audible originals.
You can start listening today with a 30-day
Audible free trial.
Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
So welcome to 2021 and we have quite a schedule
ahead for the year, starting next week with
a look at Cryonics and what the ability to
freeze people and revive them would mean for
our civilization.
We’ll follow that up with our Mid-Month
weekend bonus episode, “Machine OVerlords
& Post-Discontent Societies” on Sunday,
January 17, then in two weeks we will return
to the Alien Civilizations series for a look
at Oceanic Aliens.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us itunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
