This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
I heard some scientists were surprised when they  
discovered a particle that moves 
faster than the speed of light...  
I guess they just didn’t see it coming.
 
We occasionally talk about what Faster than Light,  
or FTL, travel or communication might imply for 
exploring the Universe but mostly on this show,  
unlike virtually every science fiction setting, we 
take the stance that light speed is a hard limit,  
something you can’t even reach with a spaceship 
let alone exceed. Folks often ask me to discuss  
why this is the case or what it would mean if it 
weren’t, and if we would do some episodes on it. 
 
In point of fact, we did, our FTL series was one 
of our first on the show and I rarely mention them  
because production-wise they’re early episodes 
and show it, and folks have been asking for it  
to be replaced or expanded on for a long 
while now, and we’ll go ahead and do that,  
but I thought we’d reopen the topic by discussing 
why its problematic to reach or exceed light speed  
and overviewing some of the suggested workarounds 
and what they require of reality. As an example,  
and one we will get to in more detail later today, 
most versions of warp drives or wormholes require  
negative matter or negative energy to operate, 
that’s baked into the math and theories for them,  
and we have no evidence for 
the existence of such matter.
 
That’s what we’ll be looking at in our summary for 
today and our effective prologue to the reboot of  
that FTL series, the basics of why FTL isn’t 
thought to be allowed under known physics and  
the various ways proposed FTL methods might exist 
if that understanding is incomplete, or flawed,  
or if we can find some cheat code to reality.
And while I mostly mean cheating reality in the  
context of us not really understanding the rules 
of our Universes or finding exploitable loopholes,  
or wormholes, it is worth remembering that all 
we study are the natural laws of this Universe,  
we don’t know where those laws come from or 
if there is some additional layers of reality.  
Indeed concepts like Hyperspace usually imply a 
congruent universe with different physical laws,  
but we also don’t know that we can’t change 
our own Universes laws. Same as a video game or  
simulation has parameters in it a programmer can 
alter, we might be able to do that to our reality,  
increasing the speed of light for instance. 
Indeed we can’t even say conclusively if we are  
in a simulation or not. Short of a programmer 
or simulator choosing to inform you that you  
live in a simulated reality, you can 
never prove you are or are not in one.  
As we often say on this show, the better question 
isn’t if this is all real or not, but if it even  
matters, and if you live in some simulation 
or equivalent, being able to tamper with  
the code locally or globally, or universally, is 
potentially very handy and a way to travel fast.
 
Now that simulation notion is of more than 
tangential interest to us today because we  
need to ask why there’s a maximum speed, the speed 
of light, and the first thing to understand about  
that is that it is somewhat misnamed. The maximum 
speed of information would be more appropriate.
 
Light was the first thing traveling 
at that speed that we found,  
Ole Roemer having demonstrated it with the Moons 
of Jupiter in 1676, almost 350 years ago, but we  
also believe any massless particle moves at this 
speed, such as the graviton, gluon, or neutrino.  
Except the neutrino turned out to have a tiny 
amount of mass and be moving just the tiniest  
fraction slower than light, and indeed we tend 
to just assume those other three – photons,  
gluons, and gravitons – have no mass but 
they could each have a tiny amount of it.  
It is not really possible to prove something 
has zero mass, anymore than that something is  
infinite in scope, or for that matter identical 
to something else, or basically equal to 1.  
0, 1, and infinity are all philosophically and 
scientifically tricky numbers. We can’t actually  
prove two protons or two neutrons have exactly 
identical mass to each other, that any proton  
has exactly 1 proton mass, we just assume that 
it is probably so and have demonstrated that any  
variance is either very tiny or very rare.
If photons have mass, even a tiny bit of it,  
then they could not be moving at the speed of 
light, rather they’d move just a tiny amount under  
that. Though of course they would be moving at 
the speed of light since they are light particles,  
but as I said, the name is a touch misleading as 
it's really the fastest speed that information  
or cause and effect can occur at. If photons 
turned out to have a little rest mass, then they  
would be moving just a little slower than that, 
but they’d still be moving at light speed since  
that’s how we measure or approximate that speed 
in the first place. Again not an ideal name.
 
We’ll never get it renamed but I like thinking 
of it as the speed of cause and effect better  
than the speed of light not just because it's 
more conceptually accurate but also because  
it’s often easier for folks to believe in 
the idea of it as a maximum speed. Realizing  
that this speed limit is a maximum rate that cause 
and effect can happen at, the speed of causality,  
makes it feel a lot less arbitrary and hard to 
get around than simply the speed light moves.
 
The second big thing to understand about 
the speed of light, or speed of causality,  
is that it is not even vaguely a limit on how 
fast objects can move away from each other.  
Quite a few objects move faster than the speed of 
light, indeed very nearly all the Universe does.
 
Wait! Say What?
Yeah, most of the Universe is moving  
away from us faster than the speed of light, and 
we’ve known about that nearly as long as we’ve  
known about Einstein’s theories of Special and 
General Relativity. This is Hubble Expansion, and  
we believe it is caused by little pockets of space 
simply randomly appearing from nothing all over  
the Universe, probably little Planck-length wide 
ones as small to an atom as an atom is to a planet  
simply emerging here and there, probably many have 
emerged right inside you and me, and a net effect  
is the Universe gains in volume as this proceeds.
Since this appears to be Universal and random,  
then at some given distance you would expect 
to have about a meter of new space appearing  
between you and that point in any given second. 
That means if you were moving a meter per second,  
a casual walking speed, you would never reach that 
other object as new space would appear between you  
and it as fast as you walked it. This distance 
is about 15 parsecs or 46 light years, so it's  
no distance you are walking anyway, but at double 
that distance it would be moving away twice as  
fast, 2 meters per second, faster than you could 
walk so that you’d be getting further away even if  
you were walking toward it constantly, with time 
it would be moving ever faster and faster away  
as that distance increased and was more space from 
random new space to emerge between you and it. 
 
Well the speed of light is 300 million meters per 
second, so before you even get 14 billion light  
years from Earth, you’ve got objects moving away 
from us so fast that the light leaving them or us  
can’t cover that new distance 
as fast as its being added.  
Light that left them or us a long while back 
when we were closing will arrive eventually,  
red-shifted, but no signal sent by them 
today or us to them will ever get heard  
and you’ll never get a spaceship there because 
it can’t travel at light speed or faster.  
As this space grows and expands things currently 
only a billion light years away from us will get  
so far away and so fastly moving away that they 
will disappear from our Observable Universe and  
vice-versa. Indeed only maybe the twenty or thirty 
closest galaxies to us, out of many billions,  
will not eventually disappear this way, and most 
of the things we can see with our most powerful  
telescopes are already beyond this speed, no light 
emitted by them today will ever reach us again.
 
Which in my experience is a statement that 
either infuriates or frustrates most folks.  
Didn’t you just say the vast majority of the 
Universe is moving away from us faster than light?  
And now you are saying nothing can move 
faster than light? That’s nonsensical.
 
And yes it is, because its an abridged statement 
really. Like I said there’s all sorts of objects  
that move faster than speed of light, what 
can’t move faster than that is cause and effect.  
Events can’t transpire faster than that speed.
 
Now you’ve probably seen Einstein’s equation 
before, E=mc² plus the Lorentz equation and so  
on and I can put those up on the screen but I’m 
not very interested in discussing those today.  
Frankly I’m not sure it is very helpful – 
especially for the topic of FTL – to show how math  
says you can’t exceed light speed. The math says 
what it says but its describing a concept, and the  
concept there is that objects made of energy – be 
that pure mass energy or other types – experience  
time, and thus can experience cause and effect. 
Again this is all about cause and effect and an  
object you look at that has all of its energy – 
from your perspective – invested as mass energy,  
which is to say a big rock sitting next to 
you, experiences the maximum passage of time.  
Alternatively objects that are moving have some 
of their total energy involved in that motion,  
and as a result are experiencing less time. At 
least from your perspective, and in reverse they’d  
see time moving a bit slower for you if they were 
watching you while you moved apart. All energy an  
object has is only countable in context to some 
other object, or relative to it, the energy object  
A has relative to object B. For the moment don’t 
worry about why this is the case, just absorb that  
energy comes in a lot of forms, and only what 
we call mass is really experiencing time. 
 
Potential energy, like what you have when 
high above something massive like our planet,  
also slows time, and thus time slows near black 
holes. Energy and time are inextricably linked,  
and indeed are complimentary variables in 
quantum mechanics and the Uncertainty Principle,  
same as position and momentum are to each other. 
The more precisely you know something’s position,  
the less precisely you can 
know its momentum, and so too,  
the more precisely you know how much energy 
something has, the less precise you can be about  
how much time is passing for it and vice versa.
This is at a more core and metaphysical level what  
is happening. Things can’t experience cause and 
effect with some other object without experiencing  
time and the larger a portion of an objects 
energy, relative to another object, is in things  
other than mass – like energy of motion or gravity 
– the slower that passage of time or cause and  
effect between them is happening. Indeed something 
with only non-mass energy, like a photon is  
believed to be, experiences no time whatsoever. 
That photon is less some spherical blob-like  
particle moving through space and more like a very 
long line of energy stretched between two events,  
its creation at a given time and place, and its 
absorption or scattering at some later time and  
place. It itself has no internal action or events 
going on during this, it’s a stretched packet of  
energy, potentially billions of light year long, 
and if you want to think of this as how red  
shift of light works, that the long redshifted 
ones are particularly stretched out and weak,  
then that’s a bit oversimplified but 
maybe easier to conceptually understand.
 
For everything with mass, then from 
any given observer that objects total  
energy is going to be at most 100% mass – or 
maximum time experience between you and it.  
Now in practice even an object stationary to you, 
like the screen you are watching this episode on,  
has some other energies beside mass from 
your perspective. It has heat energy,  
the random motion of particles its made of, and it 
got some gravitational potential energy with you,  
you both pull on each other just a little bit, 
but for you and me and the objects we interact  
with these other energies generally make up 
far less than a percent of the total energy  
that object has relative to us. Key word there, 
relative to us, because its mass might be the same  
whether it sitting next to me or moving away 
from me, but that motion takes energy and its  
not energy that object has relative to something 
glued to it, or in the eyes of passing observer.
 
Those other energies though are slowing time 
in terms of you interacting with that object,  
and they can get to be very significant 
outside our daily lives here on Earth.  
Again most objects in this Universe are 
moving away from us, and each other,  
faster than light, so we can’t experience any time 
with them at all, no cause and effect exchanges.  
Things moving very fast relative to us, like some 
spaceship flying by, or things with a lot of mass,  
like a star or black hole, have so much non-mass 
energy relative to us that their cause and effect  
exchanges between us and them are much slower.
Weird concept, but essentially mass is that thing  
which experiences time and interactions, and the 
bigger the ratio of it to other energies involved,  
the faster those interactions occur. Now an object 
with mass must always be able to experience some  
time, since no matter how fast it is going 
relative to you, it still has mass, and this  
is why you can never get to that maximum speed, 
or rather, why you can never experience zero time  
passage, because no matter how much energy I dump 
into an object to move it faster, some portion of  
it is still going to be mass, and experience time, 
even if its only 1 part in a million, what we call  
ultra-relativistic, and we do that ratio and 
more in laboratories for particles, where they  
are genuinely experiencing time millions of 
time slower than a nearby clock would read. 
 
Now why is this speed, this speed of light or 
speed of causality, 300 million meters per second?  
We don’t know, we don’t know why the amount of 
gravitational force a kilogram of mass exerts  
at 1 meters distance is 67 picoNewtons, not say, 
1 Newton, and there may be Universes where its  
higher and there may be some way to alter the laws 
of reality to make it be 1 newton, there may be  
places where light speed is higher or lower and 
maybe we can change that speed of causality, or  
change how much force a kilogram of matter exerts 
gravitationally, but this is the kind of change  
we’re talking about when we talk about getting 
around light speed. It's not a wall to punch  
through, it's a barrier the way 2+2=4 and making 
it equal five requires breaking some barrier.
 
Its not some speed limit for matter 
or energy in that sort of sense,  
just phrasing it that way predisposes us to view 
it as some barrier to break. Folks don’t really  
sit around and debate whether or not we can make a 
kilogram of matter make more gravity or less, but  
it’s the same sort of fundamental reality change.
This is the critical notion though, we don’t care  
about equations beyond them letting us figure 
out the specific rates things are going at,  
what we care about is that things going on, 
genuine events involving cause and effect,  
can only occur at certain rates. Some galaxy 
flying away from us at twice light speed is  
no longer interacting with us, there is 
no cause and effect possible between us.
 
So too, we can make objects move faster than 
light, they just cannot be capable of relaying  
information or causing and effecting things faster 
than light speed. We’ve got two easy examples.  
I can take a very powerful laser pointer and point 
it at Mars, several light minutes away, and the  
beam will arrive there several light minutes 
later. I can now whip that beam around very  
quickly, so that it moved over the surface of Mars 
faster than light, but that dot of light won’t  
actually move to reflect me swiveling it around 
in my hand until several minutes later. And if I  
use that dot to write a letter, or a high powered 
version to carve my name into Mars’s surface, I  
am conveying information but it still won’t happen 
there for several minutes. I can move that dot at  
arbitrarily high speeds, and write information, 
or communicate information, but it is delayed.  
I am the cause of that beam moving, and it has 
an effect when it arrives, and the dot itself  
can move faster than light, but all those effects 
I cause won’t happen until several minutes pass.
 
Now we have objects called pulsars, that are 
giving off light and radiation same as any star,  
but they’re dead stars emitting it more in one set 
of directions than another and they are spinning  
very fast, seconds or fractions of seconds, not a 
day like on Earth or around a month for our Sun,  
so this causes a strobing effect akin to if you 
spun a flashlight on a table and look looked at  
the wall as the beam went by. This happens with 
pulsars on Nebulae, giant gas clouds often near  
pulsars, and would be another example of a 
superluminal effect as the beam is whipping  
through the Nebula in a circle maybe once a second 
while the cloud of gas its illuminating might be  
a light year away. It is faster than light but no 
cause and effect is occurring faster than light.
 
You can do this exact same effect with something 
emitting shadows rather than a light beam too,  
and unlike a light beams, which is 
a continuous beam of energy packets,  
a shadow is composed of nothing at 
all. But it is still an object. 
 
Or is it? It contains no 
matter or energy after all.
 
This isn’t a semantic point, because we can call 
a shadow intangible and thus not a real object,  
but that’s not the same as saying it has no 
mass or energy. After all, a radio beam is  
pretty intangible to us too. We probably do not 
want the defining line between real and unreal,  
tangible and intangible, concrete or 
abstract, each all specifically hinging  
on if something contains mass or energy.
Now it's doubly important because our  
equations that say how fast something is 
going start giving different answers if we  
stick negative or imaginary numbers into 
them. As I said, we don’t want to focus  
on the equations for relativity because they 
are not driving the events or rules, they are  
just the constructs we use for calculating 
the effects, no more real than a shadow.
 
However it is a good place to introduce the 
concept of negative matter or negative energy.  
We’ll reserve a deep dive for another day, but 
in general our FTL methods for warp drive or  
wormholes rely on the notion that the square 
root of -1, an imaginary number, can exist,  
or that things can have negative masses. This 
is anything but a given. We hear things like  
negative charge or anti-matter and shrug and say 
something could presumably have negative mass too  
but there is no such thing as negative charge. 
Electric charge is just a left and right, heads  
and tails sort of quantity and we chose to assign 
that a numerical value as positive and negative.
 
It implies genuine negativity no more than a 
battery for storing electricity contains cannons,  
which is where we got the term battery, Benjamin 
Franklin thought it looked like a battery of  
weapons, and borrowed a lot of other artillery 
terms for electricity, including charge, the names  
don’t imply protons or electrons contain artillery 
units or that charge actually is positive or  
negative, it's just opposite, and antimatter is 
matter with an opposite or mirror quality too.  
We say matter and antimatter annihilate, but they 
don’t actually disappear, merging two bits of  
matter and antimatter just makes them change into 
something else, most typically a pair of powerful  
photons, that energy doesn’t cease to exist and 
anti-matter doesn’t contain negative energy.
 
But we’ve got notions for things like negative, 
opposite, mirror reflection, shadows, and so on  
so the idea of negative mass or imaginary seems 
viable. If you put that into the Lorentz Equation  
though you can get value for speeds higher 
than light. This is cheat 1 for FTL, we have  
negative and imaginary numbers in mathematics, 
and if we stuff them into the equations, we can  
get negative flows of time, events happening 
after their cause for instance, or matter that  
pushes other matter away from it by negative 
gravity, or which cause spacetime to expand,  
rather than contract, as dense amounts of normal 
matter do, or dense amounts of energy also do.
 
Now we may well find things with those properties, 
matter that emits gravitational push instead of  
pull, and that might permit a stable wormhole as 
we’ll detail in the future, but fundamentally it’s  
a math trick. We have not one single particle of 
negative matter, nor should we assume it exists.  
Mass is a trait that can be measured in quantity, 
like cookies, a negative cookie is not a real  
thing. If I bake cookies and put them into a 
cookie jar, I can’t be charged with stealing  
negative cookies from that cookie jar. It's 
nonsensical physically and it doesn’t matter  
if it's mathematically possible. Assuming mass 
comes in a negative form simply because we can  
conceive of a negative number is no more valid 
than assuming the existence of negative cookies,  
or assuming you can have a negative speed. 
You don’t, you have a speed relative to  
some other object, we can phrase that as 
negative to imply its getting closer to you,  
which would be a negative speed away, but it 
doesn’t mean that object has negative momentum  
anymore than owing your friend $20 implies the 
existence of a negative 20 dollar bill or negative  
goods. Similarly, an objects kinetic energy is 
based on the square of its speed or velocity,  
it cannot be a negative number, 
all numbers, positive or negative,  
yield a positive number as their square, 
except that the square of an imaginary number  
is negative, so something with an imaginary 
speed can have a negative kinetic energy.  
Normal things only have negative values relative 
to something else, not in absolute terms.
 
I’m not sure what an imaginary speed would mean in 
real physical terms, presumably going faster at it  
produces energy rather than taking more energy to 
speed up, and going too fast can get you imaginary  
speeding tickets, and Descartes named imaginary 
numbers that, imaginary, for a reason. They  
aren’t real, they’re just useful mathematically.
Of course it depends on what we mean by real I  
suppose. We shouldn’t assume that stuffing numbers 
into an equation can have a real world result,  
like violating light speed by using imaginary 
speeds or negative masses, but real is discussing  
our known universe. There could be Universes where 
you do have mass that pushes other mass away,  
rather than attracting it, or where pushing on 
something makes it fly toward you, not away.  
You could have Universes with no mass 
or energy, in favor of some other thing.  
We could also have these in our 
Universe and just not know of it yet.
 
Anyway that’s the basic notion of a warp drive, 
though there are many flavors, you can crunch  
spacetime down with a lot of mass or energy in one 
spot, and a negative version of that should do the  
reverse, expand spacetime. If you can crunch 
spacetime down ahead of you while expanding it  
behind you, this offers a way to move an object in 
a given direction and one that’s not using classic  
motion and energy in a way that’s constrained 
by relativity. Those no violation of cause and  
effect here, any more than faster than light 
expansion between distant galaxies causes it.
 
This also offers a non-FTL version called the Bias 
Drive, which uses a glob of negative matter and  
a glob of regular matter to create a non-uniform 
field of gravity, kinda like an electric dipole,  
to cause a spaceship attached to them to fall 
in one direction, as a means of propulsion.  
That’s an example of how negative mass is still 
insanely valuable even if it didn’t permit FTL. 
 
Negative matter is also potentially handy 
for creating the throats of wormholes,  
which is basically creating a big black hole 
then jamming a ring of negative matter into  
it to permit travel to the singularity in the 
middle with out being crushed or torn apart,  
and presumably out the other side into elsewhere 
in this Universe, or some other Universe..
 
As already mentioned, that’s another option for 
FTL, you cheat the game by playing it elsewhere,  
some place congruent to our own Universe that 
was either smaller or had a faster speed limit.  
You jump there, move, then jump back here. 
This is generally the notion of Hyperspace.  
This works just fine, if such places exist, and 
if there’s a way to travel to them and back,  
and if they actually had congruency to our 
own Universe. We have not a single bit of  
evidence backing any one of those three being 
true, but none opposed either, to be fair.
 
Tachyons are another concept for unreal matter. 
They were really popular in science fiction in the  
1980s and 1990s and have largely disappeared in 
favor of quantum entanglement as the scifi go-to  
method of realistic FTL. So we’ll discuss those 
two options before closing out for the day. 
 
Tachyon’s cheat reality by being a particle 
that exists on the other side of the light  
speed barrier, they don’t have negative mass, 
they have imaginary mass, and they’re not  
so much a specific particle as a type, akin to 
antimatter mirror reflections of regular matter,  
or matter with negative mass, tachyonic matter is 
particles with imaginary mass. In context we’ll  
sometimes call matter with real mass tardyonic 
matter, it moves slow or is tardy, and matter with  
no mass, like photons, luxons or luxonic matter, 
lux meaning light. Tachyons move faster than light  
and move backward in time because imaginary 
quantities when squared are negative numbers.  
It doesn’t have to be mass incidentally, imaginary 
speeds or imaginary distance or other imaginary  
quantities – again where imaginary means the 
square root of negative number – can offer FTL  
options, mathematically anyway. Imaginary 
time, as a second temporal dimension,  
much like we have 3 physical dimensions, 
has also been a popular topic at times.
 
That’s the math basis for the answer, and again 
just because it works in math doesn’t mean it  
does in reality. Though I should note we have some 
reason to think there are imaginary mass fields,  
the Higgs boson is suspected of being of 
imaginary mass when in its uncondensed form,  
and it’s a good reminder that what we tend to 
think of as reality at the macroscopic human scale  
doesn’t seem to match up too well with 
what goes on at the quantum scale. 
 
Which leads us into quantum entanglement. 
That was the topic for the entirety of our  
first original episode of the FTL series, way 
way back, and frankly that one relatively short  
episode still wasn’t enough time to discuss the 
topic properly, so we’ll probably give its own  
longer episode in this new series, but to abridge 
it even more for today, quantum entanglement has  
become the new go-to method for realistic 
scifi FTL because something does seem to  
happen faster than light there, what Einstein 
famously called spooky action at a distance.
 
Quantum Entanglement is centered on two or 
more particles being entangled to each other,  
this is a temporary condition and 
would include cases of matter creation,  
where a particle and its anti-particle 
are made by some collision or emission,  
what we call pair-production. Entanglement 
is usually referring to their spin-states,  
which would have to be opposite in this 
case. I like to explain entanglement and  
spooky action at a distance using coins 
as an example so we’ll just say in a  
pair production case of entanglement one 
comes out heads and the other is tails. 
 
Let’s imagine an electron and its antiparticle, 
the positron, being created, and one  
has to be heads and the other tails. But this is 
an example like with Schrodinger’s cat of Quantum,  
where as both particles are flying away, 
they are simultaneously head and tails,  
and its only when we measure one that we force 
it to be either heads or tails. We can’t control  
which it comes out as, it either comes out heads 
or tails, and its twin will be the reverse,  
and will be so instantly or as close to it as 
we can tell, even if separated by light years. 
 
This sounds like a really neat and easy way to 
send information – or matter – faster than light,  
since the effect seems to happen this way, 
but unfortunately it is not. First of all,  
measuring an entangled particle breaks that 
entanglement afterwards. You measure a particle,  
its heads, its partner is now known to be tails, 
and after this they aren’t entangled anymore.  
Me flipping that coin from heads to tails 
isn’t making its former partner flip  
and thus you can’t have two boxes of entangled 
matter light years apart acting as some telegraph  
machine. There’s a lot more to how entanglement 
and spooky action happens, I am oversimplifying,  
and whether or not spooky action is happening 
that way depends on which interpretation of  
Quantum you’re using, but at its core you can’t 
use it to send information, to have a cause and  
effect faster than light other than the other 
particle going into a random but opposite state.
 
As another conceptual example of this, if I send 
out two letters, one saying this letter is printed  
in red ink and is one of a pair, the other printed 
in green, then the person who opens that letter  
up, either one, instantly knows the content of 
the other letter too, that its red or green,  
even if that letter is 50 million light years 
away when opened. The two are entangled,  
but we can’t use this to send information faster 
than light. The difference here is that the two  
letters would be quantum objects flickering back 
and forth between red and green ink until I opened  
it and determined it was red or green on mine. 
Again that’s oversimplified and we’ll examine the  
concept of quantum entanglement for FTL, and 
for some other handy uses, some other time.
 
As we will with the others, and we will try to ask 
for each case what the real world consequences and  
uses would be too, like how you might lay out a 
wormhole network for a galactic empire, in future  
episodes. For today we’re trying to explain why, 
even though FTL is ubiquitous in science fiction,  
it tends to be viewed much more pessimistically as 
a future option in science itself. FTL tends to be  
synonymous with time travel and paradoxes, again 
exactly because it's not really faster than light,  
it's faster than causality and when 
causes aren’t proceeding effects  
you get time getting weird and paradoxes. 
My last two examples of why FTL probably isn’t  
possible are intuitive rather than scientific. 
First for time travel, think of all the time  
travel episodes, shows, films, and books you’ve 
encountered and how full of handwaves and plot  
holes they tend to be when you ponder them, 
ask if maybe that’s because time is essentially  
pointed in the direction of effect following 
cause so that if you’re trying to move them the  
other way or twist them around you inevitably 
get something which doesn’t make sense. 
 
On the FTL front alone, I appeal to the 
Fermi Paradox, our big question of where  
all the aliens are in this huge and ancient 
Universe. They don’t seem to be around,  
and that’s hard enough to explain with 
concepts like rare conditions and great filters  
when a potential civilization needs to have 
emerged before us and relatively near us. 
 
If they can move faster than light, they could 
have visited or colonized our own galaxy even  
if their origin point was 10 billion light years 
away, or more, beyond the edge of our Observable  
Universe, and this massively increases the 
volume of space they could originate from  
and requires far more improbabilities in 
evolution to intelligence and technology  
than a slower than light universe does. 
FTL only exacerbates the Fermi Paradox,  
and when you throw in time travel, which is 
generally connected to most FTL options anyway,  
then it's not about if we evolved first 
in our area of the galaxy anymore,  
you have to contemplate encountering civilizations 
that originate from planets that haven’t even  
formed yet in regions of the Universe light 
from us has never reached and never will.
 
Folks are often sad to think this staple 
of science fiction might be impossible,  
they feel it denies us the stars, and so many of 
our episodes on this show are about showing how we  
can reach them anyway, even slower than light, but 
we should also keep in mind that there’s a good  
chance that the only reason we are even around to 
contemplate the option is that FTL is impossible  
and no aliens ever figured it out and colonized 
our world before we had a chance to exist.  
So maybe this limitation is something 
we should be grateful for instead.
 
So we were talking about the Speed of Light today 
and in our last episode we discussed more of the  
nature and metaphysics of how this limits works, 
and if you would to improve your understanding  
of Relativity, I would recommend Brilliant’s 
course on Classical Mechanics and their look  
at Einstein’s Theory of Relativity.
I remember when I first started  
studying Special Relativity in college and how 
counter-intuitive it all was to me back then,  
so I can tell you first hand that yes, it does 
eventually make sense once you work with it, and  
that the best way to achieve that understanding 
is hands on problem solving with it. 
 
Our long time show sponsor, Brilliant, is a 
website and app built off this very principle: you  
learn best while doing and solving in real-time, 
not by long lectures or memorising formulas and  
facts. With Brilliant you can jump right into 
solving problems and be coached bit-by-bit until,  
before you even realize it, you've learned a 
new subject in STEM. And if you do get stuck  
or make a mistake you can read the explanations 
to find out more and learn at your own pace.
 
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether 
you want to start at the basics of math, science,  
and computer science, or try any of their many 
excellent daily challenges, which combined with  
a cup of coffee is one of my favorites ways 
to get my brain jumpstarted for the day.
 
If you'd like to join me and a community 
of 8 million learners and educators today,  
click the link in the episode description down 
below or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
 
So that will wrap us up for today but 
we’re only getting started for July,  
with 4 more Thursdays to go. But we 
also have our usual mid-month Scifi  
Sunday and End of the Month Livestream Q&A, and 
we’ll also be teaming up this month with Rudyard  
of WhatIfAltHist for a collaboration episode 
looking at the Geopolitics of Space Colonization.  
Next Thursday we will also be continuing our 
Galactic Domination series with a look at Strip  
Mining the Galaxy, and the week after that if 
we should be going to Mars or the Moon First.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us iTunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
