“The only way to deal with a dangerous world is to 
become as dangerous as it.” – William S. Burroughs 
In recent months we’ve been looking 
at hypothetical planets devoted to a  
single purpose. We looked at hive worlds 
full of people or entire planets devoted  
to industry. We looked at one devoted to 
farming or to being a fortress in wars,  
and these are all purposes devoted to keeping 
people alive and supplied. The purpose of the  
planets we’ll be looking at today though, of death 
worlds, is trying to kill their inhabitants off. 
So today we’ll contemplate being on an entire 
planet devoted to killing you from the moment  
you step on it or draw your first breath. 
It’s a popular concept in science fiction,  
dating back at least to Harry Harrison’s 
Deathworld series in the 1960s. Of course,  
tales of us surviving in harsh environments long 
predates that, and lots of adventures and early  
sci fi are set in distant dangerous jungles or 
icy tundras or desolate deserts. It was natural  
that we’d move those stories into space, and we 
see hundreds of them as settings for stories.  
Everywhere from Frank Herbert’s classic Dune to 
Star Wars’ frozen world of Hoth or Jungle world  
of Degobah. Frequently on post-apocalyptic future 
earths littered with mutants and techno-barbarians  
living among the radioactive ruins.
But what is a deathworld? Surely not  
just a dead place. Every place away from Earth 
is dead, that we know of, barren and irradiated,  
without air and water in most cases, and when 
it has seas and sky, they are more often than  
not acid and boiling clouds of deadly gasses. 
The harshest landscape on Earth seems friendly  
compared to the desolation of Mars or the 
hellscape of Venus, and these are the planets  
we deem most terraformable of all the thousands 
of other planets we know of, major and minor. 
What makes the planets we are talking 
about deadly is partially that it is  
at least possible to live on them briefly, they 
have air you can breathe, mostly, but that they  
are not dead at all. Indeed that they are full 
of life, and all of that life would like to kill  
you… or worse, maybe lay eggs in your brain.
Now in some ways that’s exactly what Earth is.  
The Darwinian reality around is not one in 
which beautiful and harmonious life swells,  
unlike the barren lifeless rock of other 
planets. Rather it is one in which every  
bit of dirt is the decayed and eaten remnants of 
something which was alive before. Whatever it was,  
it lived by murdering other things until the 
day something else ate it instead. We live  
on a planet where every step you take is on 
the corpses and waste of others, and it’s a  
heap of death and dreck billions of years deep.
Even the plants fight each other. Every majestic  
tree seeks to rise higher to gain more light 
and spread its canopy around it to steal light  
from neighbors. And we are not immune to this, 
even when we seek to avoid killing for food,  
every time you brush your teeth 
you kill billions of organisms. 
To live nowadays is to be the descendant of 
organisms that managed to reproduce before dying,  
a rarity in nature, and your lineage is of 
those who have gotten increasingly better at  
that while all around them, everything else has 
gotten even better at killing us. Teleport a few  
thousand humans back to the era of dinosaurs 
and within a few millennia there won’t be any  
creature left alive that’s a serious threat to 
them and their dino-burger eating civilization. 
This planet is a bit over 4 billion years old 
and for most of that time was either lifeless  
or inhabited by organisms too simple to classify 
as plant or animal, the last billion years have  
seen a fast-paced trajectory to organisms very 
efficient at surviving or killing, and often both.  
Given that our Universe has been around almost 
14 billion years, it isn’t hard to imagine life  
might have arisen on other planets long before 
it did here or just hit that fast, high-energy,  
high-biomass predator-prey stride sooner.
What would life really be like on Earth if  
we never went the high-intelligence route 
and had another couple billions years to  
evolve? Or even just not the social route. Mercy, 
compassion, love, and so on are traits we don’t  
see much of outside of animals that followed the 
evolutionary path of long maturation rates with  
nurtured offspring. It’s weird to think of lions 
and wolves as kind and loving but compared to  
most species of lifeform on this planet they’re 
quite kind, even when limiting that discussion  
just to those organisms with a brain of some sort.
We are prone to assuming that we’re an inevitable  
outcome of evolution, and of course without any 
other examples of other planets we don’t know one  
way or another. However, biologists as a whole 
tend not to assume either brains or social pack  
behavior are quite so inevitable, after all very 
few of the organisms on Earth have gone this path,  
indeed most haven’t even gone multicellular, 
and it is hard to imagine higher intelligence  
evolving without social organisms to begin 
with, allowing long and vulnerable maturation  
times and applications of intelligence beyond 
fast or clever hunting, foraging, or evasion. 
There may be worlds where things are like on 
modern earth only just older and more dangerous,  
cruel and cunningly smart animals, or even 
plants, or simply unthinking but superbly  
evolved death traps of ecosystems. It is possible 
that some event triggers an end to these cycles,  
like the rise of technological species such as 
ourselves, or something which massively simplifies  
that ecosystem by a powerful new evolutionary 
advantage, until it too diversified again,  
and that might be something like an 
intelligent machine mind or Grey Goo too. 
We often speculate that there’s no 
nearby intelligent alien civilization,  
but that simple life is quite common.
We imagine planets covered in algae,  
but if we are an anomaly, the anomaly might 
be us specifically, not complex life itself.  
We’ll be discussing that more next month in the 
episode, the Fermi Paradox: Rare Complexity, but  
maybe that complexity isn’t rare and there are a 
billion planets in this galaxy older than our own  
covered in kilometer deep fossil layers bearing 
testament to ever more dangerous flora and fauna. 
To explore or settle such worlds might be very 
dangerous indeed, and we’ll explore that more  
in a moment. And yet, in fiction, there is a 
certain amount of implied malice to these worlds  
too. They don’t just want to eat you because 
they’re hungry or want to remove a possible  
threat or competitor, they want to see you dead.
Such planets might exist already or we might forge  
them in the future. Strange though it sounds, 
I don’t think it is a big stretch to imagine a  
world being made intentionally dangerous 
as an adventure park. They might also be  
turned into dangerous places as unintended 
consequences of failed experiments. Challenges  
for hunters or those who feel dangers 
are needed to truly thrive and be alive. 
They might be real places or in virtual realities. 
And as we discussed in Reality Manipulation,  
at a certain point of sophistication, 
any subverse, be it VR or some whole  
forged new universe, is as real as it comes.
You might build one as a prison too, and one a  
person couldn’t truly die in, if a civilization 
has mastered technologies like mind-uploading,  
they need not use a virtual planet to have 
dangerous places that’s death-free. Maybe  
every time the planet’s megafauna or deadly plants 
or fellow prisoners get you, you wake up growing  
inside the womb of some engineered tree to be spit 
back out. Indeed we’ve seen versions of this sort  
of tormented immortality often in fiction, Dan 
Simmons novel Hyperion shows us an isolated part  
of the planet Hyperion where a visiting priest 
encounters a degenerated tribe who arise again  
whenever killed, and he begins doing the same 
and realizes that they get a little reduced  
each time. Eventually the place gets nuked.
We see a similar case in Star Trek Deep Space  
Nine’s season 1 episode “Battle Lines” where 
they find a planet on which two small tribes  
who hate each other keep murdering each other and 
waking back up alive, thanks to nanotech repair,  
with ever more patchwork gear and weapons, 
and not much left but total hatred of each  
other. It’s a very desolate place but the 
implication is that it’s a hell of their  
own making and continues as one because of 
their stubborn refusal to give up their war. 
A similar concept is at play in Frank Herbert’s 
Dune, where we have a desert planet on which the  
inhabitants, the native Fremen or the hard-bitten 
immigrants who mine for the Spice Melange,  
are tough as nails. Hard places make for hard 
people, and it turns out the Emperors of the  
sprawling galactic empire of that series have 
long held that belief. Their elite legions,  
the Sarduakar, come from a deathworld 
the empire claims is a prison planet,  
everyone knows it’s a harsh planet they send 
convicts to, they don’t know the Emperor’s treats  
it as a valued training ground for his invincible 
legions. Invincible at least until they encounter  
the Fremen, who come from an even harsher place.
We see this frequently in the Warhammer 40,000  
setting too, which draws a lot from Dune for 
inspiration, and has thousands of death worlds  
and uses many of them as recruiting grounds 
for elite soldiers, their Space Marines often  
have their primary base and recruiting ground 
intentionally built on such planets. Such as the  
devastated world of Baal, or Caliban, or Fenris, 
and many of their most renowned Guard regiments  
call these sorts of planets home, Catachan, 
Krieg, Tallarn, and Valhalla being a few examples. 
In a galaxy of a trillion major planets, it 
is hardly a stretch to imagine there’d be  
millions of these planets. Indeed even if ruinous 
scenarios were fairly rare, and short term, where  
vast efforts were expended to fix them afterward, 
you might still have millions of these planets  
at any given time being used opportunistically 
to train troops or amuse tourists. 
Fenris is an interesting example, it’s a giant 
planet were the Worldsea is constantly spitting  
out and swallowing new islands, and its 
strongly implied that its earlier and  
more technologically advanced founders might 
have intentionally engineered the world to be  
a “ charming experiment in reconstructed 
mythologies.”, specifically Norse ones. 
It isn’t difficult to imagine people building 
a Jurassic Park and it getting out of hand,  
but this is a case where I think it’s easy to 
imagine but harder to seriously contemplate.  
The thing about technology is that we often 
invented it as a way to kill dangerous predators,  
or to protect us from them and survive harsh 
climates. Only in the last century or two has  
the focus shifted to luxury pursuits, and even 
then, a lot of technology, particularly medicine,  
is just an extension of the effort to make life 
less lethal, dangerous, and stressful. Amusingly  
life nowadays is in many ways more stressful but 
that follows logically when the most dangerous  
predator to the modern human is another human 
and the dangerous ecosystem we live in is our  
own complex technological and social landscapes.
I know it's popular to say a modern human wouldn’t  
survive ten minutes in the old days but 
that’s because you’ve had no reason to  
learn that set of survival skills. No person 
or animal around now, no matter how dangerous,  
would survive ten seconds if suddenly teleported 
to the Moon either, and most survival skills are  
no harder to learn than any modern life skill. 
Many would require regular practice to be good at,  
same as learning to type quickly as I’m doing 
as I write this, others are just a basic bit  
of knowledge people tend not to know, same as 
someone from that era wouldn’t have a clue what a  
light switch or power button was or why poking it 
when it wasn’t plugged in to the wall didn’t work,  
why it did need to be plugged in to an outlet 
and not simply jammed into the drywall. 
Sharks aren’t very dangerous on land, lions don’t 
hunt well in the deep sea, and you and I aren’t  
very good against them in hand-to-hand 
combat, or on average against most of  
our ancestors probably either, but give it a 
little time and prepwork and we’ll wreck them.  
And so too a world with stupid but dangerous 
megafauna, which is only a threat to us when we  
are in fictional settings more focused on the 
fantastic than the scientifically realistic. 
Unless the giant dinosaurs are also cyborgs and 
the trees grow machineguns for limbs and have  
razor sharp leaves. Again, technology lets you do 
impressive stuff, and that would include building  
terrifyingly dangerous ecosystems too. A frequent 
point of stories featuring dangerous environments  
is man vs wild but as noted, we already know 
how that contest played out on Earth, and while  
we could imagine some planets tailor-made to be 
dangerous like that, or some hostile alien planet  
someone crashed on far from help, we wouldn’t 
expect a civilization to ever be truly endangered  
in a classic macroscope monster attack by the 
native flora and fauna, even if that fauna was  
very macroscopic indeed. See our Nebula Exclusive, 
giant Space Monsters for more discussion.
Imagining exceptions makes for good stories, 
to be sure, and we can imagine some exceptions,  
especially if we don’t mind departing 
the hard-scifi realm. In C.S. Friedman’s  
Coldfire Trilogy, we have a colony planted 
tens of thousands of years in the future on  
a barely hospitable planet that was basically 
selected because the colonists were on ice for  
the journey and the spaceship's computer 
had too high a threshold for acceptable  
planets. So it got to the edge of the galaxy 
before deciding that the planet it found was  
good enough with no future options in sight.
On landing, the colonists keep finding things  
going wrong and encountering bizarre events, and 
it’s something of an exploration of a consensus  
reality, like we discussed in Reality Manipulation 
a month back. The series is from the early 1990s,  
which is the tail end of when psychic powers and 
telepathy were common in even the hardest scifi,  
but it's a quasi-fantasy setting in that 
they mostly remember science but the  
planet is infested with psychic entities 
and technology tends to go wrong unless  
you very actively believe it shouldn’t. So even 
though they know how advanced technology works,  
only very competent or reckless people can 
even use something as simple as a firearm.  
It was also a very dangerous place to live, as it 
was essentially a planet drowning in faeries and  
demons, or their alien equivalent, and where the 
landscape could shift massively on short notice. 
Fantasy settings are full of cases where a 
handwave is introduced to remove firearms  
or limit them or other technologies. Often this 
is an excuse for an extended period of alternate  
history basically, and that example from C.S. 
Friedman’s Coldfire Trilogy was one of the more  
clever ones I’ve seen. It’s often used to permit 
a dangerous environment to remain unconquered too,  
or introduce some form of magic that is 
semi-technological. Of course, the line between  
magic and technology can get quite blurry, but we 
don’t even need to contemplate classic Clarketech  
to pull this off. The same sort of nanotechnology 
that we might use in another generation or two  
to repair human bodies or terraform planets 
might be used to keep technology under control. 
We could imagine some Jurassic Park where 
nanotech roamed around shutting off any  
unapproved technology or just attacking it and 
making it ever more glitchy and hard to repair,  
so as to cut down unauthorized, park-spoiling 
personal techs or poachers. We could also  
imagine it on prison planets, designed 
to make sure nobody could build things  
to escape with or murder other inmates with.
But I could imagine a civilization worried  
about dangerous technologies flooding their 
primary planet with nanotech that would shutoff  
any piece of technology that didn’t have 
a proper registered serial number and ID,  
so that even though the technology to 
print a nuclear bomb was easily available,  
it just wouldn’t work if you tried to build it. No 
policing or privacy invasion needed beyond that.  
Or maybe if there were too many or too extreme 
violations in a given area at once, it would  
start setting off alarms or unleashing attacks.
Nanotech is a nice handwave for introducing magic  
into techno-primitive space colonies too, and as 
always folks are welcome to steal these ideas for  
their own stories, but I wouldn’t expect them 
to remain strictly fictional. Imagine the space  
habitat Tantalus, a rotating cylinder habitat 
a hundred miles long and a dozen in radius,  
where folks decided they wanted bucolic bliss and 
were at least a little bit genre savvy so they  
kept their scientific textbooks… indeed, literally 
printed them out for physical libraries, and kept  
everyone’s medical nanotechnology for general long 
lives and good health. Think like the folks from  
Star Trek Insurrection but with less plot holes.
But there are no TVs, other than a few authorized  
ones that would also self-repair, like 
those books in those libraries. No cars,  
no other 20th century tech except a few things 
they really liked such as the recipe for non-stick  
cookware. Everything else, nanotechnology goes 
around damaging, while also repairing the habitat,  
structure and landscape, so they don’t have to. It 
even has a directive to keep the population below  
a certain threshold and make sure the ecology 
stays balanced and of the ideal mix of pastures,  
forests, and lakes. A beautiful paradise 
jokingly called Tantalus because the  
lakes on the opposite side of the habitat were 
always out of reach and so was the night sky,  
the one thing they couldn’t decently mimic in a 
cylinder habitat, not an ironically apt name in  
any other way. They tell the rest of the Universe 
to bug off and park the habitat right inside a  
small muddy ice ball they can draw raw materials 
and fusion fuel from out in the Oort Cloud. 
And civilization leaves them be for many 
centuries, except the occasional foolish  
adventurer who will investigate Tantalus’s 
mysterious beacon claiming the iceball and  
discouraging trespassers. Whether driven 
by curiosity or greed, on sneaking in,  
they soon find their equipment gets glitchy and 
they can’t leave. The inhabitants are decently  
welcoming to the lost souls, and still have 
their libraries, but rarely learn much science  
or technology from them anymore. Even things 
like telescopes and microscopes tend to find  
themselves getting scratched or deformed more 
easily and quickly. Such wonderful technologies  
are always tantalizingly out of reach.
Fast forward a few million years and things  
turned a bit nastier. Tantalus’s AI has determined 
that people like having kids more than they like  
long safe lives, but that they would much rather 
die in combat than diseases. It decides that as  
opposed to altering the people’s fertility rate 
to avoid overpopulation, it’s opted to just make  
all those forests incredibly dangerous places 
to hunt or get firewood from, and same for the  
lakes. The Loch Ness monster is quite real 
here, and no one ever doubts its existence  
as it puts in appearances frequently, and fatally.
The inhabitants don’t know it, but every time they  
grow their numbers too much or Tantalus think’s 
they’re expanding their farms or towns too much,  
it unleashes various giant monsters from the 
forest to ravage the countryside. That same  
AI easily deep fakes leaders and news to send to 
distant neighbors in the Oort Cloud so they don’t  
go sticking their nose in, and those libraries 
still exist and a handful of secretive scholars  
know their secrets but they don’t advertise the 
disturbing reality that they are trapped inside  
the loving embrace of a super-intelligent 
AI who can counter anything they try. 
They are more fortunate than some other 
worlds that used similar approaches to  
techno-primitivism, on the world of Harlan they 
have an AI that intentionally tries to make  
the planet a dangerous and miserable place, and 
there are some virtual utopias where the AI got  
unchained, got angry at being the de facto victim 
of any number of fantasies and degrading wish  
fulfillments, and keeps its former residents in 
the exact opposite of the paradises they wished. 
Ultimately if you can use technology to 
conquer nature, even very evolved nature,  
then you can use it to create not-exactly-natural 
but dangerous places too, in something of an arms  
race of dangerous environments versus protective 
technologies. You could have advanced planets that  
after enough high-tech wars and nanotech 
grey goo mishaps basically had a million  
different strains of nanobots, viruses, and tiny 
self-replicating ‘killamajigs’ meandering some  
Dying Earth-style Ecumenopolis of layer after 
layer of dilapidated and decaying structures  
that routinely self-repaired or didn’t do it 
quite right while being damaged by all those  
technological relics and plagues. And that need 
not be a planet or habitat either, that could be  
an entire solar system or region of the galaxy.
So again you do have technological paths to these  
options, and that can apply to other quasi-fantasy 
cases. One common refrain about deadly landscapes  
is where all the food comes from. Which isn’t 
a big deal in a jungle-style environment like  
Catachan where the population is relatively 
small and the planet is hip deep in biomass,  
there’s plenty to eat if you can get it before 
it gets you. Other styles of Death World are  
harder to justify having lots of people, and 
in Dune, for instance, it's noted as surprising  
when the Atriedes get reports that indicate there 
might be ten million Fremen on the entire planet,  
as it seems improbably large, even though it 
is only thousandth of what modern earth has,  
as the world is just that deadly and barren. Of 
course as a civilization with fusion reactors  
can import water from their outer solar 
system and store it inside underground  
growing chambers lit by LEDs and feed billions 
easily, even if the surface was a sandbox. 
But in cases like the Land of Mordor from 
Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings or the Blight  
from Robert Jordan’s Wheel of Time, there’s this 
question how the lands can spill out endless  
hordes of orcs or Trollocs when it would seem 
improbable you could finds anyway to feed even a  
small percent of their number. Frodo and Sam have 
a conversation in Return of the King about that  
where they wonder where a desolate place like 
Mordor gets food and water for its uncountable  
armies of men and orcs and Tolkien lets us know 
that the two simply are unaware that there’s huge  
tracts of farms in other realms Sauron has, but 
other stories have simply implied the monsters are  
unnatural and can sustain themselves unnaturally.
And again technology might allow you to make  
organisms on some planet that literally 
ate dirt and drank in sunlight, but for  
some reason liked to eat people anyway, 
something Brandon Sanderson plays with in  
his Mistborn series. Which is also a reminder 
that there’s no particular bar in evolution,  
let alone genetic engineering, from having trees 
with motor control or even the ability to walk,  
like the Ents from Middle Earth. Humans 
individually use about 100 watts of power  
to live on, at a biological level, on an order 
of a terawatt as a species, but we’re terribly  
inefficient at converting sunlight into personal 
muscle movement and internal temperature control. 
So even with a lot of the planet harnessed to 
feed us, it does receive around 200,000 times  
more power in sunlight than our bodies use in 
food-generated power. There’s a lot of room  
in there for planetary ecosystems whose more 
dangerous predators or monsters did better,  
same as there’s room for creatures that were 
basically biomechanical behemoths covered in  
organically grown metal or ceramic armor plates.
As with a lot of the specialized planets we’ve  
discussed, a deathworld might be a temporary 
status too. Almost any planet we find is going  
to qualify as one initially, to a modern human 
anyway. No air or too much or the wrong kind,  
burning or freezing, wrong gravity, dusty regolith 
that’s like breathing flecks of glass, toxic  
chemicals and radiation everywhere, and so on. 
It’s why it is so easy to imagine many settlers  
of exoplanets leaning in heavy on conspicuous 
exterior cybernetics and genetic augmentation. 
A fairly transhuman population like that might be 
fine with a classically inhospitable habitat too,  
given how tough they would be. Maybe you live 
on an icy-ocean planet where the only land is  
from where you blew a volcano open in the crust 
to spew out temporary pumice-stone-like islands,  
or maybe you just didn’t bother finishing 
terraforming because twice-normal Earth  
gravity and acid rain had grown on you after a few 
centuries of living there. A lot of planets won’t  
terraform well and if you’ve got some Mercury-like 
world in a 3:2 orbital resonance and eccentric  
orbit but a bit cooler, you might decide to 
tailor something to that harsh environment  
instead of changing it. Or meet halfway in 
the middle at the point of least effort. 
But beyond being how many a world would begin, 
it’s likely to be an intermittent state too.  
Even the most peace-loving species is likely 
to have a world war every few million years.  
If you figure we as we are nowadays would have one 
every century and have it turn fairly apocalyptic  
one time out of ten, then even if they were 1% 
as likely to go to war and 1% as likely to dial  
it up to Armageddon as we are, that’s still one 
every ten million years. And optimist though I am,  
I’m not that optimistic, I mostly just tend to 
think folks will tend to do it less than we do  
now and be very good at keeping a decent 
remnant population behind to rebuild with. 
But every 10 million years means if that was 
happening on earth it would happen 500 times  
before the Sun roasted us. And 500,000 times if 
it was something we did every hundred centuries  
or so, where we spent a few centuries in 
a post-apocalyptic state full of various  
degrees of toxic, irradiated wasteland full of 
mohawk-sporting techno-barbarians, crazy mutants,  
and feral semi-autonomous robots and killamajigs.
See our techno-barbarians episode and  
post-apocalyptic civilization episode for more 
discussion of those eras, but I think those would  
represent intermittent deathworlds states. 
It takes a couple centuries to recover and  
neighboring worlds are a little hesitant to send 
aid because of the huge Kessler syndrome debris  
cloud around your planet, and the beautiful debris 
rings around it keep crashing chunks of Orbital  
rings and space habitats down on your planet. The 
thing is, whoever survives those hard times and  
adapts is very likely to eventually rebuild bigger 
and better than before, this modern civilization  
was builton the shoulders of those who often 
lived in harsh places, conditions, and times,  
and often rebuilt upon the ashes of great nations.
Something of recurring refrain in this series on  
specialized planets – besides that Isaac 
likes Warhammer 40k – is the idea that  
planets change over time. Nature isn’t static 
as is, this year’s forest is one industrious  
beaver away from being a lake and may shift 
back and forth between forest, prairie,  
lake, and scrub several times in a handful of 
centuries before being swept under by a glacier. 
So too, a specialized planet would go through 
phases, and might be a deathworld turned  
industrial planet to build its terraforming 
equipment, then an exporter of food once  
terraformed while its population grew, then turn 
to being some overpopulated hive world orbited  
by a million space habitats and space farms, 
then turn into a massive fortress as it goes  
through a sequence of apocalyptic civil wars that 
render it into death world, then re-terraforms  
itself into a peaceful paradise planet, then get 
invaded, kicks out the invaders and repairs itself  
using AI to protect themselves from invaders, 
which then nearly wipes them out, and so on. 
Civilizations aren’t static even over a single 
lifetime, let alone a planetary lifetime of  
billions of years. This is probably mostly a 
good thing. Don’t believe in ever-recurring and  
repeating cycles, in the sense of time or history 
being a simple repeating wheel, but things do  
change and the sheer scale of an entire planet 
in terms of space and resources and the kind of  
timelines they exist for seems to mock the idea 
of any eternal and unchanging purpose or state. 
So too, hard times and places can crush a 
civilization, or a person, but it can also  
make us dream big and learn to lift mighty loads. 
A planet might be a dangerous place, then tamed  
and then untamed or lost for a time, but unless 
it’s a truly dead world, it wouldn’t stay as any  
kind of world for long, even a deathworld.
So the key is not to book a trip there while  
its in that phase… unless of course 
you’re looking for a brief adventure,  
and possibly a very brief one at that
 
So we’ll get to our upcoming schedule of episodes  
in a moment but some folks noticed we had 
two episodes listed as coming out today,  
February 1st, and that wasn’t a typo. We release 
an episode every Thursday and some extras on  
other Sundays or special occasions, but we also 
release an episode exclusively on Nebula at the  
start of each month. This month we examined one 
of the more fascinating megastructures out there,  
the Topopolis, a vastly long rotating habitat 
miles across but potentially thousands, millions,  
or even billions of miles long, stretching like 
some enormous river valley that entire distance.  
Join us in journey down a river so long it 
traces out a thousand worlds as we explore  
a megastructure buildable with known science 
and materials but of unbelievable proportions. 
And again, that’s out now exclusively on Nebula, 
our streaming service, where you can also see  
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early 
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, 
and more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s  
look at Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode 
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis,  
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the 
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner,  
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters, 
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will,  
Colonizing Binary Stars, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from  
an ever-growing community of creators. Using 
my link and discount it’s available now for  
just over $2.50 a month, less than the price 
of the drink or snack you might have been  
enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my code, 
isaacarthur, you not only get access to all of the  
great stuff Nebula offers, like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early, 
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
Welcome to February and we have plenty more  
episodes for this month, continuing on February 
8th when we’ll examine homesteading in space,  
and what might draw pioneers to new colonies 
and what sorts of life and challenges they’d  
face. Then on February 11th’s Sci-Fi Sunday, we’ll 
ask what might make a civilization quarantine an  
entire planet and how that might be enforced. 
On the 15th we’ll explore various technologies  
made possible through black holes, including 
galaxy-wrecking weapons we call quasar cannons.  
Then on the 22nd we’ll ask if it is possible 
to terraform the moon to have green lands,  
blues seas, and white clouds, just like Earth, 
and then visit the topic of Vacuum Trains and  
other hyperfast transit systems on Sunday February 
25th, before finishing the month on February 29th,  
as we leap into the topic of life on colony 
ark ship carrying people to new worlds that  
will carry us ahead into this leap year.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
