This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
There are trillions of planets in this galaxy,
but nature probably didn’t hand us any other
pre-made worlds we can just move into, so
we’ll have to forge them into livable worlds,
but as they say if you want something done
right, you have to do it yourself.
So today we return to our Becoming an Interplanetary
species Series to look at Terraforming and
Para-Terraforming.
In the previous 5 episodes we followed the
National Space Society Roadmap to Space Settlement,
which is linked in the episode description,
and which breaks it into 6 parts.
We covered the first 5 in each of the previous
5 episodes.
However, part 6 is a bit broader, consisting
of more separate topics and I felt the Topic
of Terraforming needed its own episode.
It’s a topic we have looked at before but
I wanted to discuss our available Techniques
for Terraforming, along with what certain
advanced technologies might permit, as well
as discuss the motivation for doing it.
Terraforming is changing a planet to be livable
for Earth-based life forms, it literally means
to form a world to be Earth-like.
Alternatively, we have Bioforming, which is
the adaptation of life to live on a new planet,
rather than altering the planet.
In practice we would expect a mixture of the
two, rather than a pure use of just one, but
either should be possible if you are willing
to go to the effort.
One key notion from the outset, terraforming
is all about how much effort you’re willing
to throw at a planet – not that we’re
limited to planets – and while some of the
processes are gradual improvements you can
do in steps, others are all-or-nothing procedures
that you have to commit to from the beginning.
For some of the processes, it would be little
different and little easier to terraform a
world to be like Earth than it would be to
construct a planet in its entirety, like one
of the Megastructures we often discuss on
the Show, entirely artificial worlds ranging
from the size of an island to the size of
a galaxy.
You can build a planet, though it is obviously
no easy feat, and in truth terraforming one
can be just as hard.
It just depends on how far you need to go
and how far you are willing to go.
We have two terms, para-terraforming and terraforming,
the former usually meaning doing things more
along the lines of building pressurized domes
and creating ecologies inside, but there is
no distinct line between the two or between
a megastructure built as an artificial habitat
and a planet that has been terraformed.
Indeed, many of our terraforming processes
will involve the use of megastructures.
Let us start with that basic variety though,
domes over large areas, potentially over an
entire planet, what sometimes gets called
a Worldhouse.
Conceptually this is easy enough and likely
a common process to start on worlds.
You build transparent or translucent domes
over an area and just build more and more
of them, until you have covered an area like
a film of soap bubbles.
This is easily accomplished in-situ as well,
as we can make transparent materials out of
many substances but silicon and oxygen, the
main constituents of glass, are generally
going to be abundant on any rocky surface
be it the Moon or Mars or a random asteroid.
Transparency is not necessarily your goal
either, as you might be getting too much light
or too much of certain spectrums.
Regular glass for instance does not allow
much ultraviolet light through, and in many
cases you will need to block ultraviolet light.
Ultraviolet is one of the primary spectrums
of the electromagnetic spectrum, and comes
in three types UV-A, UV-B, and UV-C. UV-A
is what we mostly encounter on Earth, and
is often called Soft UV.
UV-B is mostly blocked by our atmosphere,
while UV-C is completely blocked and a good
thing too as it's germicidal and hard on lifeforms.
Nor is it the only type of radiation our atmosphere
blocks, and it takes more than a few hundred
meters of air to do that.
Even worlds farther from our Sun that get
less light, still get far more of these dangerous
frequencies of radiation than we do, simply
because they have nothing filtering it out,
so any domes need that protection too.
Atmospheres also help to minimize debris hitting
Earth, as it burns up before reaching the
ground.
Planets will generally be hit by millions
of kilograms of random space debris in a given
year and every gram of it moving faster than
any bullet from a gun.
Whatever the escape velocity of the planet
you're on is, you can assume that without
an atmosphere a piece of space debris will
strike the ground with at least that velocity,
as it will pick up that much speed just from
entering the gravity well of the planet.
Your typical bullet fired from a gun has less
than a hundredth the kinetic energy it would
have moving at Earth’s escape velocity,
and the space debris is mostly very small,
far more tiny rocks than big ones, so in a
given year a planet might get peppered with
billions of tiny pebbles carrying more force
than a bullet without an atmosphere.
Now that’s not as bad as it sounds, a dome
about the size of a house is only a hundred
square meters or so, whereas planets generally
have hundreds of trillions of square meters
of surface area, so even if a billion bullets
fell from the sky every year a dome that size
would only have about a 1 in thousand chance
of being hit.
If you’re building thousands of domes though,
let alone millions or billions, some will
get hit.
Nonetheless without an atmosphere you need
to be building sturdy domes and you want to
keep them small.
You might want them multi-layered too so that
an object striking one of the outer panes
can shatter and lose energy before striking
the other layers.
You might even fill them with something denser
and clear like water.
Alternatively, the light on most worlds won’t
match what we have either.
The Sun is weaker on Mars and Stronger on
Venus, for instance.
So you might decide instead to live under
an opaque and thick armored dome, something
like a mushroom, with a clear stalk and thick
stone above as the cap, and mirrors around
it to shine light inward.
We also need to remember that you can’t
just build a dome above a piece of dirt and
start farming.
Our soil on Earth – as opposed to Regolith
on other worlds – is very weathered and
soft from untold centuries of erosion and
biology, and the latter results in many important
microbes in that soil too that help it live.
Alien Regolith might be quite toxic too, beyond
just having sharp flakes, so you don’t just
dome above but place floor below, and build
your ecology over that floor after carefully
processing the regolith.
You would crush and mix and separate it till
it had a safe chemical composition and then
probably dump it into big vats of churning
water with algae and microbes till you got
yourself a nice muddy brew of soil to use.
We have a notion of dropping comets on planets
to add water, and nitrogen too – oxygen
is always plentiful on rocky planets even
if it is tied up in those rocks – and you
can do this but it is easy to forget how much
mass you are talking about moving.
The Biblical story of Noah and the Flood,
or other flood tales, is either the work of
an omnipotent being or mythology, and thus
the mechanics involved in actually doing that
aren’t terribly relevant but they would
be if we were trying to do it ourselves.
If it rained 10 centimeters or 4 inches of
water every day for forty days, planet wide,
you would only have raised the sea level 4
meters or 13 feet.
The average depth of Earth’s oceans is around
a thousand times that, so you would have to
rain at that rate for around a century to
add that much water[a].
You could certainly add it faster, but keep
in mind what we said early about objects striking
a planet having at least the speed of that
planet’s escape velocity.
If you try to add a meter, or 1000 kilograms,
of water to a given square meter of Mars’
surface every day, at an incoming speed of
say 10 kilometers per second, that means you
are adding 50 billion joules of energy to
it every day and 580,000 joules a second,
or 580 kilowatts.
That is around a thousand times the energy
places like Mars and Earth get from the Sun
on a given square meter of land and also more
than enough heat to boil all that water, indeed
it is a good deal more energy than an equal
amount of gasoline or jet fuel has.
You wouldn’t think of warming Mars up by
hitting it with icy comets but that is what
you would do.
If you limited yourself to just 100 watts
per square meter of incoming mass, which would
probably let you avoid burning or boiling
everything on that planet to death, that would
let you add about 6 centimeters of water to
Mars per year, and achieve the Earth-average
Ocean depth in a mere 50,000 years.
Terraforming is not a fast process and ironically
the major delay is more likely to be heat
dissipation issues than manpower or resource
limitations.
In all the talk I hear about adding mass or
water or even air to a planet, nobody ever
seems to bring up that whole heat issue of
raining all that material down.
Air is a lot lighter than water to be sure,
and our oceans mass about 300 times what our
atmosphere does, but that still means you
need to take centuries to import that mass
of gas to avoid overheating the place.
Though if the place is already fairly cold
like Mars would be, much of that heat might
be absorbed into the upper levels of rock
so long as you give it time.
Of course changing the temperature of rock
also changes its size, materials expand and
contract with temperature changes and if you
are massively altering the temperature of
a planet because it's too cold for people,
or too hot, expect a lot of shaking and shattering
and shifting as the ground expands or contracts,
plus all the flash floods and erosion of adding
air and water.
Terraforming is not a gentle process on a
planet and is not something that makes the
place look the same except for seeming to
spray paint it with ocean blue, plant green,
and cloud white.
This is remaking whole continents, you are
going to mess with the geography as much as
if you engaged in asteroid orbital bombardment
or flat out nuking the surface, even if you
are doing things slow.
Incidentally we often do talk of nuking planets
as part of terraforming them, usually in humorous
tone but it’s not actually a joke, that
is one of the cheaper ways to terraform in
terms of rapid atmosphere generation and warming,
and lifeless planets are generally already
radiation scoured hellholes so temporarily
irradiating the surface when you plan to plow
that all under anyway while making your soil
is not really a big deal.
Fall out is fairly short term before decaying,
and even if you didn’t bury it under meters
of rock as shielding it would be long gone
as a threat before that planet was some place
people walked around on in shorts and t-shirts
eating fruit grown on trees under an open
sky.
You also aren’t just dropping a few comets
on a planet to bring it water and air.
The entire Asteroid Belt is only two or three
times as massive as Earth’s Oceans, for
all its millions of rocks, and wouldn’t
have enough ice for it.
You need to add around a billion cubic kilometers
of water to a planet to get to Earth levels
and your typical big comet might get you a
millionth of the way there.
Fortunately there is no shortage of ice, even
at this scale, out in the Kuiper Belt and
Oort Cloud, water is one of the most common
molecules in the Universe.
Though you might find it cheaper to import
in hydrogen from gas giants and bind it to
locally available oxygen to make your water.
Alternatively a dome is a lot easier, you
only need to add about a kilogram of air per
square meter of floor for every meter of height
the thing has.
You probably only need a few hundred larger
comets rich in ammonia for the nitrogen to
provide all the air, and water, that you would
need to fill up a domed-over planet of gardenscapes
and shallow lakes.
That is a lot more manageable and something
you can build incrementally.
Eventually you will leak enough air from them
all to create an atmosphere, but if you want
that ocean you need to leak a lot more and
you might want to be thinking about making
your domes mobile or buoyant, since they do
need floors anyway.
Atmospheres on planets leak for a variety
of reasons and leak faster the thicker they
are, but the main method of losing air and
water is from hydrogen atoms, when some bit
of radiation or chemistry breaks them free,
to be bounced out of the atmosphere.
Wrapping the planet in a magnetic field causes
them to deflect back down and be recaptured.
Magnetospheres are made naturally by having
a ton of molten metal spinning around in the
core of a planet but are hardly the only way
to make a magnetic field and not a good way
of doing it either.
If we’re considering trying to protect Mars
from the solar wind our Sun generates, as
the major cause of atmosphere depletion, then
we need not even give Mars a magnetic field,
we could just stick a big electromagnet at
Mars’ own L-1 Lagrange point with the Sun,
run on solar power, and rely on that to deflect
the already weaker solar wind away.
Calculations vary but something in the 1 gigawatt
range should be sufficient and that’s the
equivalent of a modern nuclear reactor or
about a square kilometer of solar panels.
It’s also nothing compared to the energy
budget of terraforming in general, remember
we were talking about adding water at a rate
of half a billion joules per cubic meter,
and needing a billion-billion of them, and
that’s way more energy than it would take
to run that Lagrange Magnetic Shield for the
entire lifetime of this solar system.
Alternatively you can also put your magnets
in orbit or even in big loops around the planet
underground.
We often talk about using active support structures
like the Orbital Ring to create super-strong
shells for hollow planets, what we call Shellworlds,
and those are essentially giant electromagnets
and easily convertible into magnetospheres.
So if you are building your world that way,
making a shell you plan to fill with cheap
hydrogen gas or something more exotic like
dark matter or black holes to generate your
gravity, you already have the magnetosphere
built into it.
Though for that matter a shell-planet built
around a spinning dead star, be it black hole,
old neutron star, or old and cold white dwarf,
do have an awful strong magnetic field all
on its own.
This is why you don’t bother drilling into
some planet’s core and nuking the heck out
of it to create a magnetic field around the
planet.
Indeed about the only reason you would ever
drill down to some big rock’s core is if
you were planning to make a hollow chamber
down there and stick a black hole in it for
generating artificial gravity.
That’s a pretty extreme thing to do, and
of course requires you be able to make artificial
micro black holes, but is one way to add gravity
to a planet.
As a heads up, it doesn’t matter how big
a planet is, or asteroid or moon, it takes
the same mass per area of surface to generate
Earth-like gravity, about 12 billion kilograms
per square meter.
Gravity falls off in strength as the inverse
square of distance while the surface area
of a sphere rises with the square of distance,
so they counter each other out.
However mass does not rise with the square,
but rather the cube of radius, and various
bits of solid and mundane matter occupy only
a range of about a ton per cubic meter, like
ice, to 20 times that, for fairly rare and
dense materials like gold and osmium.
I’d emphasize rare because most dense materials
are pretty rare and valuable to be wasting
on generating gravity compared to hydrogen
and helium, which make up nearly all the mass
of normal matter in the Universe.
Terraforming very large shell planets, like
Saturn whose gravity at the edge of its atmosphere
is equal to Earth’s, can use cheap hydrogen
and helium gas compressed under its own gravity,
but if you want to make some place like Mars
have Earth-like gravity then you’d have
to hollow out the core and replace it with
something dense like Osmium or Gold, or otherwise
use an artificial black hole or some sort
of degenerate matter you found a way to keep
stable, like a white dwarf or neutron star.
Those are kept stable at their density because
they have the whole mass of a star pulling
them together without any fusion going on
to push them apart anymore, but it is conceivable
you might be able do that electromagnetically,
and if you could do that, or create black
holes, then you could arrange for Earth-like
gravity on any decently sized rock, even a
fairly modest asteroid, and the same would
apply if you figured out a way to generate
artificial gravity with electricity.
We have no idea how but there is a decent
chance it is possible to generate gravity
without mass.
Indeed the term “Terraforming” was coined
by sci-fi author Jack Williamson in regard
to making asteroids have Earth-like gravity
via an artificial gravity device.
One way around having to use 12 billion kilograms
of matters per square meter of living area,
with known technology, is to simulate gravity
by rotation, but if you like your planets
spherical and your gravity natural you do
have the option of building multiple layers
of surface, concentric shells, what we call
a Matrioshka Shell World, see that episode
for details.
You might be saying isn’t all this a little
high-tech and resource intensive?
How about simpler methods?
And that is kind of the problem, the simple
methods all involve the brute application
of raw mass and energy too, we can just cheat
sometimes by using what’s already there
or automation – including biological automation
such as genetically engineered microbes – to
get the job done.
We can make a device that will turn a rock
into oxygen and either glass or metal.
Your typical rock is just oxygen plus silicon
or iron or aluminum or such after all.
It takes a lot of energy, but we could probably
engineer a microbe that did that and used
photosynthesis to power it.
That sort of approach is a popular notion
too, but often makes folks think it would
happen fast.
In practice biology is less efficient than
some giant machine we might build to do the
same thing but using solar power.
So given that photosynthesis is usually less
than 1% efficient, and probably a good deal
less if we were measuring that efficiency
in terms of converting sunlight into oxygen
and soil, it means your typical planetary
budget for biological terraforming is going
to be on the order of a billion megawatts
at most.
Which sounds huge, and indeed is, but is planet-wide,
and you need around 30 megawatts to get a
kilogram of oxygen per second, so you are
generating about a quadrillion kilograms a
year – though that is probably optimistic
– and you need around a thousand times that,
plus whatever is leaking back into solid form
through oxidation.
So it is viable but it isn’t quick.
It really would be faster to carpet-nuke the
place and wait for the fallout to decay.
A machine will be more efficient and thus
faster.
But machines don’t build themselves, microbes
do, so are preferable, if you have the time,
unless you’ve got self-replicating machines.
Of course we probably will have those inside
the century so it mostly comes down to practical
application and preference, and the line between
self-replicating machines and biological lifeforms,
especially ones genetically engineered to
exist on some dead planet, is fairly blurry
and probably fairly arbitrary.
Critical notion though, whether you’re building
giant rotating orbital habitats or terraforming
planets or outright fabricating shell-worlds
and megastructures, automation is the key,
and one of the reasons we tend to favor rotating
habitats is because it uses so much less mass
per unit of living area, which also makes
them faster to build.
You have to terraform the insides of those
too and that is not just a matter of dumping
in rock and water and air, you will go through
many epochs of complexity as you build from
simple organisms that can live without a complex
and diverse ecosystem to slowly altering it
into something big plants and animals and
people can live in.
Fortunately epochs, when we’re talking microbes,
are quick things, lifespans of days not decades,
so you can move up the complexity chain faster,
and you’re not waiting on evolution either.
You probably are looking at massive dirt factories
involved in any terraforming project that
are using the kind of energy and automated
manpower that would dwarf our whole modern
industrial infrastructure though.
Fundamentally para-terraforming, whether its
big domes or big spinning cylinders, is your
incremental approach, and thus the one you
are likely to use.
When we want to terraform a promising planet
in another solar system, it’s likely to
be the last place in that solar system colonists
move onto, as they get all their other habitats
and industry built up off-world, while carrying
out the long and energy intensive process
of terraforming that planet as some sort of
crown jewel.
In general you are better off not having anyone
living on that planet until terraforming is
well under way too, as noted, the process
is very destructive, especially when done
quickly.
It's also not likely to ever be something
where folks cared if it was made natural and
eternal, no natural planet is a static thing
anyway, but you are far more likely to see
solutions like that LaGrange Magnetic Shield,
or the use of giant swarms of mirrors or shades
to increase or decrease the sunlight and temperature
of a world, than doing stuff like nuking the
core or moving the planet closer or further
from its sun, because it’s the difference
between wanting to keep your yard a bit shadier
by planting a tree or erecting a shade umbrella,
versus moving a mountain to just shade your
yard.
The mountain will shade your lawn much more
naturally and require no maintenance once
it's done, but replacing a shade every couple
years or planting a new tree every few decades
is still way less effort than moving that
mountain.
If your civilization has enough energy and
automation it might not care, but there are
plenty of other awesome things you can do
with that energy too, so someone talking about
moving whole planets around to make them warmer
or mashing two together to make one bigger
planet with better gravity is likely to have
folks asking why you don’t just tear the
planets apart to make trillions of rotating
habitats given that it would be faster, easier,
and provide a million times the living room
for people or nature preserves or whichever.
This doesn’t mean we’re not terraforming
in the future, it’s just recognizing that
you have a whole sliding scale of effort,
and it is probably way easier to engineer
an ecology around living on a planet with
lower gravity, a different day and year length,
and relatively shallow lakes rather than oceans,
than it is to adjust all those.
Adding air is not too hard, adding that protective
magnetosphere is not either, and lakes a few
meters deep get most of the weather and ecology
options that oceans kilometers deep offer.
Replacing and repairing your solar shades
and mirrors is easier than dragging that planet
around.
So I think that is what we’ll mostly see
for terraforming, para-terraforming of most
places to create human comfortable environments,
and bioforming everything to cover the remaining
gap.
For purists who hate bioforming, there’s
always O’Neill Cylinders and those can be
made continent sized if need be.
Mars will probably be terraformed, as will
Venus, and possibly some of the Moons of Jupiter,
we looked at the specific approaches in our
Springtime on Mars, Winter on Venus, and Summer
on Jupiter episodes, but terraforming beyond
this solar system is likely to be either very
heavy on bioforming, and very heavy on the
engineering side to the point of being effectively
megastructures as much as planets, or be limited
to those planets a lot closer in mass and
makeup to Earth than Mars or even Venus are.
The good news is that there are probably billions
of planets that are better picks for terraforming
out there in the galaxy than Mars and Venus.
Of course it’s a long trip to get there,
to claim those billions of worlds and terraform
them, and to do that we have to become more
than an Interplanetary Species, we have to
become an Interstellar Species, and we’ll
look at that in the next and final episode
of this series.
Whether our future will be on Terraformed
Planets, Artificial Cylinder Worlds, Virtual
Paradises, or any of the scenarios we discuss
on the show, one thing that seems certain
is that the key to unlocking it will be with
ever improving science and technology, and
as we head into the holidays, if you’re
still looking for gifts, I’d suggest the
gift of knowledge and problems solving skills.
If you know an inquisitive investigator that
loves asking “Why?”, our partner, Brilliant
may be just the thing for you, and them.
Brilliant is a problem solving based website
and app with a hands-on approach, with over
60 interactive courses in math, science, and
computer science, like their course on scientific
thinking, which helps show scientific principles
and how valuable they are to have in your
problem solving toolbox.
It’s a great course to introduce you to
Brilliant’s fun and thought-provoking approach
to learning, and from there you can go on
to any of their 60+ other great courses.
If you are looking to improve your own skills
in math, science, and computer science, and
want to help support our show and have fun
while you’re doing it, or know someone else
who would, you can try Brilliant out, for
free, or get is as a gift for a loved one,
by going brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So we’ll be finishing our series on Becoming
an Interplanetary Species, along with finishing
the year 2020, with a look at Becoming an
Interstellar Species, but before that we’ll
be looking at how to navigate interstellar
space, and also how we might begin the process
of going beyond being an interplanetary species
in this solar system, as we look at Low-Tech
Kardashev-2 Civilizations.
We also have our monthly livestream Q&A coming
up on Sunday, December 27.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
[a]As an interesting aside, this is the reason
terraformed planets will probably have quite
shallow oceans--the flatter geologiclly dead
terrain and the relatively less native water.
