Space is often called the final frontier, 
a place of billions and billions of worlds  
awaiting explorers and pioneers. But what will 
those journeys be like, and what gear will people  
need for them, and perhaps most importantly of 
all, what sort of people will make those travels?
 
There are a lot of famous science fiction writers, 
but only a few are of truly legendary status,  
and one of those is Robert Heinlein, often 
called the Dean of Science Fiction Writers,  
and a lot of that comes down to the sheer amount 
of accurate detail he often vested in his work.  
One of the examples of that is his novel “Have 
Space Suit - Will Travel”, in 1958, written the  
year before Starship Troopers, as the last novel 
in his young adult series with Scribner, and  
critically, before anyone has been to space and 
more than a decade before we walked on the Moon. 
I won’t spoil the novel, it's a classic, but 
it tells the story of a young man trying to win  
a trip to the moon as a prize, and instead 
getting a distant runner up gift of a used  
spacesuit in need of much repair. Our young 
protagonist goes into detail on how he fixes  
it up and Heinlein gets so many things right 
about future spacesuits, and also manages to  
make that whole explanation as entertaining as it 
is informative. The protagonist gets it working  
and restored in every detail, and ends up getting 
picked up by real aliens to begin the main plot. 
That’s part of the inspiration for today’s 
episode, probably to no one’s surprise, and  
another part is from the famous TV show that was 
on when Heinelin wrote that novel, Have Gun - Will  
Travel, which tales the tale of Paladin, who is 
a mix of investigator and gunfighter traveling  
around the Old West. Folks sometimes ask me 
where I get the inspiration for a given episode,  
and it varies, but often I’ll see some piece of 
artwork and it just says a topic to me, as the  
art for today’s episode did, and I found myself 
thinking how much of sci-fi, especially earlier  
sci-fi and space opera, is basically old wild west 
tales of the lone traveler in strange lands. Where  
the law and justice aren’t often to be found 
and you live or die on your skill and wits. 
We often say that early sci-fi is the wild 
west with laser guns for pistols and aliens  
for Indians, and there’s some truth to that, but 
I’d say they represent the same basic story we  
see in plenty of other times and places too, 
just as we often see the Samurai turned Ronin  
appear in science fiction form or knights 
and dragons or many another historical,  
literary, or mythological accounts of someone 
wandering far from home and encountering peril  
and often passing on an easier or safer life 
for the sake of their journey or principles. 
And for a lot of us, that is the 
allure of space, the great unknown,  
the final frontier, the ocean of the night.
But is it real? Is there a future where a  
person can travel from world to world and not 
just as a tourist? To actually go to those  
frontiers and make a difference? Can you have a 
lone spaceship to travel around, like a horse,  
or is there maybe the equivalent of a horse 
in that spacesuit? Maybe it is your trusted  
companion, horse or dog or even sidekick?
Maybe you don’t have a Millenium Falcon or  
Firefly, just a spacesuit and maybe a backpack. 
Or maybe you’ve just got a satchel and towel,  
like Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent in 
the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. 
The good news is that we can’t yet say for sure, 
one way or another; there are too many unknowns,  
and unknown unknowns, but we usually look 
at the universe through the lens of no FTL  
or Faster Than Light Travel or Communication. 
Folks who accept that tend to assume that you’re  
spending decades traveling between places, so 
if you’re roaming from world to world every  
episode, you’re either doing it in some form of 
cryo-stasis, or maybe virtual reality. Otherwise,  
even if you were functionally immortal, that’s 
an awful lot of years to be spent in travel to  
the next action-packed episode. 24 hours on Planet 
X followed by 24,000 days on board your personal  
space yacht, drinking tea and catching up on your 
writing, and just sitting around in the bathtub  
watching the clock tick away. What Douglas Adams 
once called the long, dark, tea time of the soul. 
And that frontier would be moving fairly fast 
from that perspective. Any given colony might  
only be a “Wild West” for a couple centuries 
before it’s grown and normalized. I can imagine  
someone looking for adventure just trailing colony 
ships on an eternal zigzag to the galactic rim,  
but that’s not really my idea of an adventurer 
hero, more like a vulture, hoping to find trouble,  
or maybe to make it. If you messed up your 
timing you’d arrive on the almost lawless  
colony to find out it was already suburbs 
and convenient stores from coast to coast. 
It could happen though, it’s a very real option 
for virtual reality worlds which aren’t likely  
to conform to standards or map out well, 
and which as we’ve discussed before, in  
our episode Virtual Worlds, might as well be real 
colonies if a certain degree of emulation accuracy  
occurs or if we drift to being post-biological. 
A trillion colonies here on Earth alone, with no  
standard for physical laws, let alone legal ones.
But it can also happen in the regular universe.  
We could imagine our hero, we’ll call him Hunter, 
chasing after a lone villain, a solo criminal who  
kept fleeing from world to world on the expanding 
galactic fringe and always had a chance to recruit  
new thugs to slow Hunter down as he tried to 
foil the villain’s scheme, and right the wrongs  
he leaves behind. Hunter’s been jumping from 
world to world at 20% of light speed for 200,000  
years now and rarely spends more than a couple 
months outside of hibernation. He’s around  
30,000 light years from Earth now, at his 414th 
stop, and in the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy trying  
to catch his nemesis who he believes is operating 
with some pirates who have taken over a peaceful  
agricultural colony on a large moon orbiting 
a gas giant around an ancient red giant star. 
Newly colonized systems don’t have very 
developed detection grids but still enough  
to spot a decelerating interstellar spaceship. So 
Hunter plans to sneak in by running his ship right  
into the star from the opposite side and plowing 
through its outer atmosphere to bleed his speed  
off, then drift in like an asteroid being caught 
by that gas giant’s gravity to its Trojan Point.  
Then he’ll get his nemesis, no time for him 
to plan, no escape this time, no holding the  
colonists hostage unless Hunter gives him a head 
start, escaping like back on Beta-9. And even if  
he somehow slips through his fingers again, 
Hunter knows it is just a matter of time. The  
galaxy’s a big place but most of it is lifeless 
and will stay that way, and even if his nemesis  
flees to each of the million habitable planets of 
the Milky Way, Hunter will find him eventually. 
I could see chases like that happening, but 
there’s no need for century-long flight times  
to a new haven or next episode, so to speak. 
Channel regulars know that the idea that most  
planets are barren and most stars unsuited to life 
is not really pertinent to what future galactic  
civilizations would look like. It may be that 
nearly every planet already has some sort of life  
and of a type we can be vaguely compatible with, 
or it may be that there is not a single microbe in  
this galaxy away from Earth, and neither matters 
to what human settlements will tend to look  
like. Odds are good that if the future settlers of 
space still resemble something more or less human,  
not AI or post-biologicals living on computers, 
then it isn’t finding that one planet in a hundred  
that’s ready for Earth-like life, it’s about that 
million minor planets in every star system waiting  
to become a space colony and a frontier town.
In our recent episode, Colonizing the Kuiper Belt,  
we noted that there were far more floating 
mountains of ice and rock in the Kuiper Belt  
than in its better known cousin, the Asteroid 
Belt between Mars and Jupiter, probably tens  
of millions of objects miles or more across, and 
that each of those could easily house thousands  
if not millions of people. They may be far apart 
but they can be reached in months or weeks without  
any FTL travel, and a spaceship between them 
need not be anything too fancy or hightech. 
Indeed, a lone person in a reasonably high-tech 
space suit might be able to make that journey.  
Things are far closer together in the inner 
system, with a million of those minor planets  
all within a light hour of Earth, and between each 
star are vast equivalents of our own Oort Cloud,  
even more spread out and remote, but likely 
containing entire major planets ejected into  
the galactic sprawl of interstellar space.
How many of these might be rocks that were  
only ever attractive for their isolation and 
unused resources? And thus not of much interest  
to immigrants beyond that initial wave, nor would 
they be likely to be able to support populations  
of major nations, just a big town perhaps?
These might be the equivalent of rural mining  
towns or log cabins, barely noticeable as more 
than a rounding error compared to the far greater  
immensity of inner system dyson swarms, and yet 
they might count in the many millions in each  
solar system and each home to thousands, if not 
millions of people, and with no clear distinction  
or ending between solar systems, for a sprawl of 
quintillions of rural settlements throughout the  
galaxy and no end to them, just a hazy, indistinct 
boundary where you might technically be in a new  
star system, but no one is too sure because 
no greater empire or star nation claims them,  
and the taxman knows better than to come 
around trying to count heads and demand money. 
In a situation like that, I think it is 
quite plausible that we would always have  
some frontier or some isolated places, even after 
the whole galaxy had been settled for a long time,  
and that some intrepid traveler might not need 
a fancy FTL spaceship or cryo-tube to survive  
the trip without dying of old age or going mad 
from the wretched boredom of being immortal and  
cruising the stars, that Long Dark Tea Time of 
the Soul I mentioned, as described by Wowbagger  
the Infinitely Prolonged in Douglas Adams’ 
novel, Life, the Universe, and Everything…  
and which I’ve always suspected was an influence 
in the creation of Trazyn the Infinite, another  
immortal sci fi character who deals with time by 
collecting antiquities, often with the assistance  
of a personal army. Neither him nor Wowbagger 
are noted for their diplomacy and kind hearts. 
Of course, if you are trying to deal with 
immortality, rolling around the stars on  
century-long voyages might be one good approach 
for that. Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged made  
it his mission to go to a planet, insult someone, 
then go find the next person on the next planet,  
in alphabetical order, and insult them too.
The million year old clones in Alastair Reynolds’  
novel House of Suns journey the galaxy in long 
circles, meeting back up with their thousand other  
clones once every couple hundred thousand years 
to share notes and memories and then go back out  
at 99% of light speed to do it again. And what 
they find is that those who aren’t using stasis  
fields and relativistic travel to help pass 
the time, even though they have effectively  
infinite life extension technology galaxy-wide, 
just tend to have an effective half-life. People  
die and civilizations collapse,and even though 
many of them were long-lived star empires who  
lasted far longer than any nation or empire of 
our past, it still remains that if you came back a  
hundred thousand years later, they were basically 
guaranteed to be gone, their civilization paved  
over and replaced dozens of times already, 
and a dozen more before you came back around  
again. Not because they were unstable, but simply 
because a thousand years is a really long time,  
and a million years a whole lot longer, and even 
if you’re so stable and unchanging that you only  
had a 1% chance of your civilization falling 
in any given century, then your odds of making  
it through a hundred centuries is pretty slim.
I don’t think there’s any civilization around  
right now that could claim they had a 99% chance 
of being basically the same in culture and border  
in a century, and honestly I don’t think that’s 
a place I‘d want to live anyway, because if  
centuries roll by and you’re still recognizable 
when it’s over, we’d also call that stagnant.  
And this isn’t necessarily meaning that they blew 
themselves up or toppled over in some civil war  
or calamity, just the sort of changes that would 
make it hard to go from Shakespearean London to  
modern times, let alone thousand of years ago when 
there was no London, and you could have walked to  
mainland Europe without getting your feet wet.
Why this matters though is something we explored  
in more detail in our Derelict Megastructures 
episode, where we noted that often, a city or  
space habitat is going to have large sections 
under repair, or abandoned for some reason.  
Even if only one in ten thousand big O’Neill 
Cylinder-sized habitats was at any given  
time evacuated or damaged and home to a relative 
handful of squatters, then in a full Dyson Swarm,  
that would mean 100 billion of them were 
in that state around this star, 200,000  
Earth’s worth of living area in an abandoned 
state, a classic galactic empire worth of  
planets all on its own, and a like number around 
every other one of the hundreds of billions of  
other stars in this galaxy. That’s an awful 
lot of ruins or frontiers for people to be  
having adventures in. To go hide from the law, or 
bring justice to that frontier, or be the bounty  
hunter looking for that criminal that fled, and 
often likely just days of travel away from some  
other place in the inner system, and maybe weeks 
or months out in the deepest interstellar voids. 
The asteroid belt in the Year 5000 AD is made 
of a few million space towns, most embedded  
into asteroids, some free floating, that each 
range from a mining town of a few hundred to the  
megalopolis of Vesta, population 2 billion. There 
are a hundred trillion people living in the belt,  
and with room for growth, with whole regions not 
being any closer to another piece of civilization  
than our own moon is to Earth. And yet the 
Belter Clans who move from settlement to  
settlement trading odds and ends can put together 
spaceships that are less sophisticated than the  
ones that brought their ancestors to the belt 
or even to the Moon. They just don’t need much  
engine to move through the Belt, and the whole 
thing is littered with old mined-out asteroids  
where people just moved on, that they can use as 
campsites or storage depots, or have to watch out  
for space pirates hiding inside. Sometimes they 
explore those because of the tens of thousands  
of derelicts and ghost towns out there, some 
are likely to still have hidden treasure in  
them in one form or another, or turn out to be 
full of malignant AI or crazed mutant cults. 
It’s all about adjusting our view of the classic 
space opera galaxy-wide setting of a few thousand  
inhabited planets to one in which a single star 
system has a billion times more towns and cities  
spread across its voids than we have here on 
Earth, and a billion more such star systems  
just inside a region of the galaxy that would 
like a lone pixel on a picture of that galaxy.  
A thousand mighty galactic empires of Space Opera 
could fit in our asteroid belt, and with it a  
million lawless mining towns and space ranches.
So that answers our question. I think that there  
would be a lot of times and places where you 
could travel alone from town to town, so to speak. 
Now, how would you do that?
That’s just as hard to answer because there  
isn’t likely to be a single method that’s equally 
applicable everywhere and everywhen. Partially  
it depends on technology. You can do a lot more 
roaming if you’ve got some little blue police box  
that’s bigger on the inside than outside and can 
jump around to any place or time in the Universe.  
But even inside known physics, it matters a lot 
if your peak energy technology is chemical fuels  
and modern batteries, or if you’ve got cheap and 
safe antimatter production and storage. If you’ve  
got the latter, then you can be traveling around 
from derelict megastructures to remote asteroid  
mines in a personal ship or even a personal suit, 
because even if you’re only carrying around 10%  
of your mass as antimatter - be it ship’s fuel 
pods or space suit backpack - that’s letting you  
move between planets in the same solar system 
in days at full 1-g thrust the whole time. 
Something like a portable and feed-able 
micro-black hole would be even better,  
as every bit of stray dust can sustain you, and 
any rock or iceball can refuel you. Or maybe  
by vacuum point energy, our topic for next week, 
where the very void of space itself, even in the  
sparsest regions of intergalactic space and cosmic 
voids, might offer you a constant power supply. 
We can imagine a spacesuit, even one potentially 
able to be made in this century, that might  
have such versatility. Probably not powered by 
antimatter or micro blackhole, but what about  
nanobot self-replicators the size of your own 
biological cells that could just use a trickle of  
power from your suit’s solar cells to cannibalize 
bits of your suit or supplies to make more solar  
panels, or a little probe or drone that could race 
off to the nearest tiny rock, cannibalize it into  
a few more drones and some supplies, and the next 
thing you know, even though you’re floating in the  
interplanetary void by yourself, and with not 
much more tech than we have today, those robots  
assemble a whole working spaceship, solar array, 
space farm, and comfortable quarters for you. 
Which it might do even if you were already dead. 
It’s hard to restore someone long dead on Earth  
because all that biology is still happening, 
you’re not just some frozen or dehydrated husk  
of a body after a few days, like you would be in 
space, you’ve been outgassing and getting eaten  
and bits or your brain might be inside a bug 
that in turn is inside some bird’s stomach a  
hundred miles away. See our episode Technological 
Resurrection for more discussion of the issues. 
But in space it might be that your suit is quite 
capable of preserving you, until help arrived,  
or help was accumulated by its self-replicating 
drones. You get flushed out of an airlock and  
it just seals you up and scans your brain to 
use that as a repair template for later. Or  
maybe it seals off your head inside the 
helmet and cannibalizes everything else  
to make rescue beacons or propel that head 
to safer territory for pickup and repair. 
Same concept applies for a spaceship of course, 
except it probably has more resources at hand.  
I’ve difficulty imagining anybody being 
very fond of that approach to survival,  
especially given that it implies you have 
that information-teleportation technology,  
where you scan a brain and transmit it 
at lightspeed to another distant place,  
but are choosing not to use it, in favor of 
taking a slower spaceship Which kind of implies  
you don’t like that option of sending 
your brain by radio or don’t trust it,  
which might be for a very good reason.
But there are a lot of aspects to survival,  
and one of the aspects that applies 
to teleportation, or hibernation,  
is that the copy of you that arrives at the 
destination isn’t you, just a copy, and you died,  
and that same worry applies to whether or not 
you maintained continuity and consciousness,  
as opposed to a thoroughly dead and frozen brain 
that’s been artificially rebuilt a century later. 
Which raises another aspect of survival, which is 
staying sane while in transit. Just doing that on  
a spaceship with potentially large sections to 
live in and spend time in seems pretty dreadful  
at times, but imaging floating in a spacesuit 
in the void, alone, or as a disembodied head,  
alone, in the void, floating like that, conscious, 
for potentially a lifetime. A potentially very,  
very long lifetime. It might not take a lot of 
power either, your brain needs about 10 watts to  
keep running, your whole body more like a 100 
watts, not a very high power requirement even  
if converting to your type of energy needs was 
losing a lot of the harvested power in conversion.  
So maintaining your active brain during 
that trip might be viewed as a fulfillable  
necessity to keep you alive - a pretty 
plausible one since you are decidedly  
dead otherwise, even if possibly restorable.
And that’s where it really helps to have that  
loyal sidekick or animal companion, your trusty 
horse or dog or mule. And yet, we need to remember  
that the suit doesn’t need to be all that much 
better than ChatGPT to allow you to chat along  
at it. And while we imagine a personal spaceship 
as a yacht of many rooms with libraries and rec  
rooms and maybe even gardens, a library in even 
the modern digital era could fit more books on  
a thumbdrive than any physical library holds, 
and I think it’s plausible enough to imagine a  
spacesuit with all sorts of heads-up displays 
and audio inputs and maybe even sophisticated  
control of sensory input and medications, and we 
could probably beam in virtual reality similar  
to what we have nowadays even without needing to 
contemplate direct neural stimulation and linkage.  
If the onboard AI makes Jarvis from Iron Man look 
like the clunky dialogue boxes of 1990s video  
games, there’s a good chance it can help keep you 
stay sane and maybe even happy on the journey. 
Now, the flip side of that though is 
that unless your suit is some special  
relic of alien origin or a bygone golden 
age, when you arrive at any destination,  
that destination has all that awesome tech too. So 
even though that regular old spacesuit might let  
you beat the snot out of iron man, it really 
is nothing of note in any place you arrive,  
and while that’s easy enough to handwave to make 
an awesome sci-fi story of basically showing up  
as the elite and dangerous lone gunfighter on 
a lawless space habitat, in reality you are  
probably just the person with the equivalent of 
the coolest camping or hunting gear and luggage. 
And probably on a spaceship equivalent 
of a passenger plane or bus even,  
though we can't rule out that the sheer amount of 
energy needed for interstellar travel might make  
it that personal one man pods or suits were 
the normal way of traveling, because it only  
meant moving a few hundred kilograms of matter to 
relativistic speeds, not several tons per person  
or even kilotons. Your Iron Man super suit with 
on board Jarvis AI - which we’ll instead call  
Oscar to avoid confusion, might be able to dodge 
any incoming space debris big enough to kill you,  
vaporize bits that were hazardous but not 
necessarily deadly, or grab them and use them  
for extra fuel, and to feed and repair you during 
the trip. I think we would tend to think of that  
like some coffin shaped pod or torpedo - we see an 
example of that when we meet Worf’s girlfriend the  
first time in Star Trek The Next Generation, and 
it’s a pretty horrifying-seeming way to travel,  
but it could be a spacesuit as easily, 
and again, it’s not going to be difficult  
to incorporate a digital library of vast 
knowledge and entertainment into that suit. 
It also raises the point that the line 
between ship and suit could be pretty hazy,  
and also that whatever it is might be changeable. 
A couple hundred kilograms of smart matter could  
be a suit one moment and a pod the next, or even 
a modestly sized room with furnishings - though  
probably hollow ones - and while big ships seem 
cool, they’re like big houses, a pain to heat and  
cool and repair. I’ve got a few thousands books 
covering the walls in my household of bookworms,  
and tons in the office downstairs where 
I write these episodes and I love those  
books and yet I mostly listen to their digital 
audiobook versions and my collection of science  
reference books and textbooks mostly sits 
idle in favor of web-searching for answers.  
People who are pretty transhuman, or cybernetic, 
or even just regular you or I, but in a suit  
like that, don’t really need the same household 
infrastructure. Even if they like physical books,  
that just means a little of their smart 
matter shifts into a book while reading it. 
I’m reminded of the stillsuits from 
Dune, which are basically spacesuits,  
and designed to be worn without removal 
whenever outside, even if for weeks at  
a time. And that is a good reminder that a 
spacesuit isn’t necessarily just for space,  
it might need to be able to do things like 
handle murderous flora and fauna in some  
alien Jurassic Park or let you walk around inside 
high pressure or high gravity environments that  
would crush a submarine, and it might do that 
by flooding your lungs with breathable liquid.  
So too, like those still suits from Dune, they 
might be quite capable of processing waste - from  
sweat and dead skin cells to urine and feces 
- and maybe right back into entirely palatable  
nutrients without needing lots of in-between 
steps like processing plants and composters.  
It probably needs a way to clean your skin too 
and keep you from getting rashes and maybe it has  
artificially lighting inside to get sunlight on 
your skin or maybe it injects you with Vitamin D. 
In the future, especially for people who don't 
live full in time in comfortable megastructures,  
for the sorts of people who work and travel 
through space, owning your own personal  
space suit might be right of passage akin to 
buying a car, and I'd expect them to be as  
personalized as our phones and bedrooms, and 
comfortable too, with plenty of room inside  
to easily scratch any itch the operator 
has. Hunter, our protagonist from earlier,  
might very well fancy a suit with a poncho like 
an old western cowboy, except his poncho is  
embedded with flexible solar and piezoelectric 
generators to top off his suit's power supply. 
He might tuck it aside if it's a nuisance 
in zero G, or let it drape over him and  
trickle-charge his suit as he walks through a 
newly established Kalpana mining town in search of  
his villainous prey. He may not necessarily need 
a spacesuit fashioned after an old cowboy theme,  
but as he's spending weeks at a time in it then it 
might as well have a style he likes. While there,  
Hunter finds out his target has taken refuge on a 
world of large alien reptile creatures and may be  
stranded. A nice scientist, who styled her bright 
pink suit to be reminiscent of pterodactyls,  
agrees to give Hunter a ride down to 
the planet's surface where he hopes  
at last to complete his centuries-long quest.
There’s an obvious implication if you’re on an  
alien Dino World that you have a jetpack and rifle 
able to kill a T-Rex, but just to spoil some old  
movies, no, a dinosaur wouldn’t survive tangling 
with armored vehicles and heavy caliber guns,  
so you probably don’t need some super canon on 
your suit, but you might have something that  
could punch out Godzilla or Cthulhu too. You 
never know what you might run into out among  
the wild stars on the galactic fringe, and 
possibly while riding on a dinosaur too,  
which would be almost as awesome as having your 
own spacesuit to travel around the final frontier.
So that’s it for today and September, but we’ll 
be back next week to begin October with a look  
at Zero Point and Vacuum Energy, mysterious 
power sources which may be even better than  
fusion as an energy supply. Then the next week 
we have two episodes exploring the fabrication of  
the future. Starting next Thursday with a look at 
spaceship factories, and then on to Sci Fi Sunday,  
on October 15th, where we’ll contemplate 
entire planets turned into giant factories, in  
Forgeworlds & Industrial Planets. Then we’ll ask 
the big question of if Life Extension Is Ethical  
on October 19th. Then we will look at another type 
of dedicated planet, Fortress Worlds, on October  
26th, and wrap things up on Sunday, October 29th, 
with our monthly Livestream Q&A. And while you’re  
waiting, you can check out last week’s livestream 
or regular episode on Atmospheric Mining. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show on Patreon, and if  
you want to donate and help in other ways, you 
can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
