1
This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
One day you wake up and every channel and
newsfeed is abuzz with the news we’ve received
an alien signal, beyond any reasonable doubt…
What do we do next?
All of our 
discussions on the Fermi Paradox on this show
and by others is predicated on the notion
that there’s been no unambiguous extraterrestrial
signal sent to us or overheard.
There’s a lot of proposed reasons for why
this should be the case, ranging from aliens
simply not existing, to them landing here
regularly and us just not seeing and believing
it.
One of the more popular reasons is just that
we haven’t really gotten good enough at
looking and haven’t been looking long enough
to detect any of them by their own regular
transmission, which might not even use radio
waves, or that they are signaling us but we
haven’t gotten good enough to recognize
it, or that they aren’t signaling us because
they haven’t seen us yet.
We’ll be examining a few different scenarios
today for what we might do if we either receive
or spot an unambiguously intelligent signal
from space, but let’s start with that one.
Our own radio signals have only penetrated
about a light century out from Earth, which
is not even a millionth of the volume of this
galaxy, and that itself would be a region
8 times bigger than the smaller volume, close
enough for them to have received a radio signal
from us, and for us to have received one back
from them.
Half the distance and an eighth the volume
to include time for a return trip for a message.
Assuming aliens don’t really expand beyond
their own solar system much, you could have
over a million alien civilizations around
the galaxy who still haven’t heard of us
but would cheerfully send a reply by tight-beamed
laser once they did.
Indeed, if you emerged in a galaxy that was
crowded with unique home worlds in which life
had evolved on and yet was still absent of
galaxy-spanning empires who’ve claimed every
star around them, it would tend to be proof
that such approaches were ineffective.
In which case nobody is likely to be scanning
the galaxy with super-intensity for the sake
of self-preservation or profit.
None of your neighbors can send warfleets
to you or offer you the secrets of practical
space travel, because they have neither.
Indeed it’s unlikely they can offer you
any useful technology, because about the only
way we could not have practical space travel
to other stars would be if power, energy,
propulsion, and automation technology basically
maxes itself out in the next few centuries,
or honestly, decades; way shorter than the
time frame for signals to travel between these
civilizations after they spot each other’s
radio signals, especially if they’re more
like a thousand light years apart, not a hundred.
And the reality is that they’re not likely
to have technologies in other fields that
translate well over distance.
Alien psychology or biology textbooks might
be interesting and contain some gems, but
probably not enough to convince your leaders
to spend larger sums of money for better SETI
gear.
The galaxy is pretty quiet because alien civilizations
mostly communicate to their distant neighbors
by tight-beam communication, like a laser,
and probably only the nearest dozen or maybe
hundred, relying on the long web of tight-beam
communications to pass interesting info along.
An awful lot of SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence, is based around this notion
or minor variations of it.
That nobody out there is in a position to
invade us because if they could, somebody
already would have by now, over the billion
of years we’ve been around.
Nobody views us as a threat because in billions
of years of civilizations existing in the
galaxy, nobody has thus far figured out a
way to be one.
So, they’re not expecting us to have valuable
new science or dangerous technology any more
than we would expect some uncontacted tribe
in the Amazon to show up one day with a new
technology that nullifies ICBMs, or possessing
sidearms that can shoot through tanks or take
out supersonic jets.
You would also tend to figure that even if
somehow one of your neighbors did suddenly
get that technology that changed the game,
it would be more likely you would find out
about it in time to react than be its first
victim.
Their nearest neighbors might be surprised
but probably not to the point of getting no
signal out, and even the sudden absence of
signals would put you on your guard and result
in something like a vengeance camera, a distant
satellite monitoring your world, set to send
a signal out to your neighbors if someone
rapidly blitzed you, which would also have
some deterrence value.
Long before they’ve conquered the galaxy,
everyone’s been on high alert and been able
to start getting good intel, and just the
knowledge that there was some new tech with
certain observable properties would likely
spur its reinvention elsewhere, given the
thousands of years you would have to work
on that problem.
Someone suddenly inventing FTL might change
that, although probably not, your odds are
too good someone got their hands on one, a
scout ship getting damaged accidentally and
recovered for instance with its partially
intact warp drive, or even defected or ran
off with the tech to start their own splinter
empire.
Even if not, our own situation would be a
strange one, as it assumes that such FTL technology
just got discovered relatively recently compared
to the age of the Universe, which is really
no different than our own usual approach to
the Fermi Paradox of assuming intelligent
civilizations are ultra-rare and growing more
probable as the Universe ages, such that you’ve
only got maybe a handful in our entire supercluster
of nearly a million galaxies, let alone our
own tiny corner of our galaxy.
FTL is recent because only recently has anyone
come into existence able to invent it.
Now, the original favored solution to the
Fermi Paradox was basically this one we’ve
been discussing, life is pretty rare and intelligence
rarer, but fundamentally that interstellar
travel was essentially impossible in any practical
sense.
Civilizations are stuck on their world, maybe
with a few interplanetary colonies that never
really thrived anymore than an arctic outpost
or settlement might, and any interstellar
colony was some economy-crippling prototype
that took centuries to get done and resulted
in some weak daughter colony that never benefited
its homeworld and diverged a lot over centuries
to come so that you felt no special kinship
to them and even worried you might have planted
a threat on your border rather than the seeds
of a galactic empire.
And you’ve still got doomsday weapons and
if there’s a finite chance in a given year
you might use them, even just 1 in a thousand,
well, you’ve probably got a civilization
lifetime measured in centuries, the same short
timescale it takes to get a message to even
your nearest neighbor.
That’s basically SETI 1.0 working premise,
inspired by the state of play in the world
Enrico Fermi, in the 1950s, having helped
invent the nuclear bomb but died before the
space race and moon landings.
After that it seemed more plausible we might
find a way to get to space and stay there,
which led to the belief that space colonization
was possible and practical and thus it didn’t
matter if alien homeworlds averaged 10 light
years apart or a hundred or thousand or even
a million, because those timelines are just
so small compared to the billions of years
our Universe has been around to matter for
the purpose of spreading outward and colonizing
everything.
This is essentially the Hart Conjecture to
the Fermi Paradox, in the 1970s, and Michael
Hart also coined the term Fermi Paradox.
Channel regulars are familiar with this already
but it bears repeating because if we get a
SETI signal tomorrow by classic radio or laser
beam, some unambiguous artificial signal that
needs decoding, then the starting point on
deductions switches back to Fermi’s default
view, but a bit more optimistic.
We just got signaled by someone who probably
does not have either FTL or practical space
travel, or alternatively does have the ability
to colonize or conquer but does not have motivation
for it and doesn’t think anyone else does
either… which would tend to imply they felt
it was pure common sense and mathematically
inevitability that folks would view it as
a waste of time.
In that last case, there’s a good chance
the signal, once decoded, would include the
reasoning and historical evidence backing
that claim, and in that case we obviously
want to make our Post-SETI action to be determining
a confirmation of those claims.
In their shoes, part of how I would do that
on the front-end is to include a lot of coordinates
and frequencies for other folks signaling,
including very distant and weak ones, which
would mean old ones.
That provides strong evidence you’re either
telling the truth or can fake signals from
ancient and wide-ranging sources, which means
you have them so surrounded that there’s
no real reason or need to lie.
You essentially have a Universe where your
nearer neighbors were definitely aware your
world existed and showed every sign of life
by probably whatever their equivalent of the
22nd century was.
The biosignature of a planet like Earth is
just going to be too obviously visible to
telescopes in the James Webb plus zone, and
would long predate humanity, let alone electricity
and radio.
But they couldn’t do much beyond that until
the planet started showing a spike in radio
waves.
They didn’t need to be able to hear and
decipher those, just see the uptick and change
in pattern, and that’s their signal to build
a new and focused telescope for that planet
and funding a few astronomy departments to
start watching it carefully for those signals,
atmospheric signature changes indicating major
industry, and maybe those first nuclear bomb
tests, undeniable signs of technology.
Note we’re kind of sliding back and forth
between what they probably do and what we
would then do, because the nature of this
setup, this Universe, is that everybody has
already had eons to come up with the best
strategy, and no one has an exclusive knowledge
on it.
As the first contactor, your goal is either
to scam this new civilization or to establish
yourself as a trusted source of information,
in the long term, and the only valuable coin
you have to trade is information, and only
those parts unique to your world, or your
speed and veracity of relaying on galactic
gossip.
To me, that tilts toward a network where everyone
is agreeing to pass on galactic gossip unadulterated,
because it's not a telephone line, just a
web of tightbeams that information can pass
along many paths on.
So your neighbors will quickly notice if you’re
lying, relatively speaking considering light
lag, and unlike gossip won’t have too hard
a time figuring out who started it.
That may or may not include each civilization
getting the glass beads treatment, conned
by getting something they truly valued but
didn’t realize was dirt cheap elsewhere.
Which might be your older and closest neighbor
racing to send you all the technological advancements
they can offer and merely asking for your
culture and history files in return.
We would trip over each other grabbing that
deal not realizing that we basically got scammed
on what really pays at the galactic scale,
all that history, art, TV, and so on, not
that blasé tech everybody has already.
Now, what’s wrong with this theory?
Well first off, the whole reason we call it
the Fermi Paradox is because this state of
play now seems paradoxical, this was Fermi’s
perspective back when blowing yourself to
smithereens seemed quite likely and getting
to another world seemed quite unlikely.
The paradox came when we started thinking
those odds looked different.
A universe where space travel is practical
and life is common isn’t one where the galaxy
is 13 billion years old and there’s valuable
real estate still lying around.
It's not even one where Earth gets conquered,
it's one where someone was already colonizing
this galaxy when Earth formed, and they snapped
it up and terraformed it.
So either the galaxy isn’t covered in civilizations
or it is and we’re a nature preserve or
experiment, variations on what we call the
Zoo Hypothesis.
In that Universe, it really doesn’t matter
what we do because we’re seen as some emerging
butterfly from its cocoon, or locust.
They’re either very glad we’re on the
scene and just decided now is the time to
say hello, or the message they sent us is
essentially either a flat warning about what
we are and aren’t allowed to do, or an apology
they’re going to need to exterminate us
to restore the preferred state of this world.
We don’t really need to plan for this scenario
in advance, because our reaction is too specific
to the message content and circumstances and
we’re essentially stuck in an extremely
confined and disadvantaged situation in terms
of self-control.
Even if they are throwing a celebration across
this local region of the galaxy that Earth
has finally spawned a wonderful new companion
for them all, it's still going to be them
essentially dictating the nature of the relationship
for the foreseeable future, even if it's not
just parental but full-on spoiled kid circumstances.
The Plan for after SETI is successful in this
regard is to be the wise guest or child, polite,
restrained, and patient while we put together
information.
Not the classic first day in prison where
you pick a fight with someone to establish
yourself in the pecking order.
That might actually be the case but this isn’t
TV, unless you pick a fight with someone in
your weight class and skill level, you’re
going to either lose badly, or imply weakness
or fear by punching down too much.
I could actually imagine something like that
in a galactic prison yard, even one where
folks were glad to see a new species emerge.
There’s not much we can say about alien
psychology with any certainty, in truth, nothing,
but the big 3 borrowed from the novel The
Killing Star is that aliens will be survival
oriented, won’t be wimps, and will assume
both are true of anyone they encounter.
Essentially nature tends to strongly favor
aggression and for cooperation to occur, so
you tend to default to a social hierarchy
built in some fashion around your skill, strength,
brains, etc and how aggressively and cleverly
you use them, which in practice tends to mean
some sort of limited fight or competition.
Not fights to the death and scorched Earth
policies.
Emphasis on limited, and so if you are getting
into the galactic prison yard, throwing a
volley of relativistic kill missiles at a
neighbor followed by a homogenizing swarm
of self-replicating murderbots might be seen
as way beyond cheating.
The competition might be very ritualized and
tournament-like, or hyper-aggressive but wish
for it to take place in virtual reality, or
it’s essentially a non-violent sport or
game like chess, and you are in trouble now
because you’ve not only sent a war fleet,
but didn’t even broadcast it for others
to see, to the extreme irritation of your
planet’s sponsors, who just lost tons of
ad revenue.
Heck, this entire universe we see around us
might be a Zoo, a virtual universe or pocket
dimension made just for growing civilizations,
and your ability to conquer or colonize it
might be the price of admission to the real
world.
In any of these cases, a little patience and
observation is wise.
Plus, in this context, if you’re new on
the scene, it's like being a toddler, not
the guy who just left free adult life for
prison life, though in a galactic situation
like that, you’re probably going to max
out your tech and basic advancement very quickly
and your neighbors presumably already have,
because everyone is really just getting the
gift or purchasing access to older research
done millions or billions of years ago by
others.
Speaking of pocket or virtual universes though,
we don’t want to ignore the possibility
that a SETI signal is coming from outside
normal reality, or even just from so far away
that there’s no need to rush any action.
It is entirely plausible that the nearest
alien civilization is a billion light years
away and sends messages by immense beacons
powered by entire stars, indeed this is essentially
the Grabby Aliens Scenario which is the default
view of this Show, that we’re not only alone
in this galaxy but that there’s only maybe
been a few thousand alien empires arising
in the whole Universe, each of whom will be
able to sweep out and colonize thousands if
not millions of galaxies before bumping into
anyone, and many quadrillions of stars.
Their beacon probably says something like
“Hello, we’re an empire of a few million
stars spreading across our galaxy and we still
haven’t detected anyone ourselves, and have
pretty much given up on FTL, our ships move
at 80% of light speed and we think that’s
the effective maximum, so we took a few spare
solar systems and converted them into beacons.
We wish you well but when you hear this in
many millions or even billions of years, please
be aware that we in any sane sense of the
meaning ‘we’ don’t really exist anymore
and the leading edge of our colonization wave
moves at 80% light speed and are as divergent
from us and each other as you are from dinosaurs
and oak trees, so good luck, and hopefully
neither you nor we have been wiped out by
our own divergent colonies or descendants
since then.”
Obviously in a case like that there’s no
scramble to reply or react.
And that’s true in almost every case for
getting a SETI message, you probably do not
even need to send any reply in a hurry but
if you do, that first one can be as simple
as “Thank you, we will think on this and
get back to you”.
There is no real advantage to rushing.
The same applies to METI, also called Active
SETI, sending signals rather than listening
for them.
For my part I think there’s just about zero
risk to active-messaging as opposed to just
listening, but I still view it as a bad idea
on principle.
Note, that this is not a decent Fermi Paradox
solution, pausing many years or even decades
to reply to messages isn’t not responding,
nor is being quiet and listening going to
result in everyone doing that indefinitely.
You’re a child in the galaxy’s dark forest,
if you hear nothing, odds are there’s nothing
to hear because no-one exists to speak, but
you still wait until you’ve had time to
expand and really think on options before
just shouting around and potentially attracting
a wolf, this does not mean everyone does that
forever, but even a few centuries of contemplation
wouldn’t mean much on the galactic stage,
unless folks tended to blow themselves up
in under a few centuries on average.
But a good active message to send is always
tailored to the target and probably what we
would get.
Folks might do the high-powered omnidirectional
beacon but more likely they send out signals
to planets that they think could have life,
and you up your odds for a reply by making
sure they know it was addressed to them.
Same as you get around spam filters and such
by including personalized data in a message,
you might send your message to that planet
by laser, and pulse it with the ratio of their
planet's year and day length.
So we might expect to get a message that had
a break every 1024 bits of data, being nicely
binary, two to the tenth power, or maybe 1080
or 1920 because that’s our default image
size these days, and that break or pattern
says a new line of the image is beginning.
They might send us images that were 365 pixels
wide, and paint a picture of the planet or
solar system with that.
And the upside there is that it’s not a
wild call into the night but rather knocking
on someone’s door, or even the window of
their dining room while they’re eating.
It says “You might as well reply because
I absolutely know you live here”.
You can double down on that if you’ve been
able to monitor their planet well enough to
decode their languages too, in which case
the message might be 365 by 24 pixels and
just read, “Hello Earth, Tune in to 109.7
FM for our introductory message”.
So that’s the plan in terms of responses,
you start by patience and not rushing to reply,
and you ask yourself first and foremost what
the message tells you about the state of affairs
in the Universe – or multiverse – and
the folks sending the message.
And one thing it tells you upfront is that
conversation is useful, which means diplomacy
is at least on the table, otherwise they would
never have sent a message, and that is valuable
information.
You can add that to what you know, which is
probably that they are survival oriented,
good at it, tough, and either unwilling or
unable to just roll over and consume the entire
galaxy, or they did but left pockets alone
for some reason, maybe they don’t like crushing
primitive worlds with unique life, but they
also might view intelligent civilizations
as friends or unwanted rivals.
Patience and humility are in order, but cowering
and cowardice probably are not, and patience
should never be confused with being frozen
and unwilling to act.
Which takes us to discuss what the effect
here on Earth is of such a message.
This is a popular topic of course and for
a lot of folks it's “when, not if”.
And I really would stress that notion of patience
and humility but not cowering or cowardice.
I think we tend to assume half our population
would go insane on finding out about alien
life and the other half would fall on their
knees and worship their new enlightened overlords.
Personally, I don’t think that would happen
much.
I’m not saying you wouldn’t have some
folks suddenly blow their brains out or start
worshipping aliens and trying to modify their
behavior or even appearance to match the aliens,
people already do that, but I don’t see
it as a mass effect.
Alternatively, I would be worried about governments
or news agencies thinking it might happen
and trying to control the narrative to cushion
the blow or avoid fumbling attempts at culture
change.
I don’t think this would result in trying
to hide it, you might be able to pull off
modest concealment for a few days while confirming
it because a lot of groups who might not usually
be Okay with protected censoring might still
go along with keeping things quiet until there
was a definite confirmation of an unambiguously
alien signal.
Getting NASA or other space groups and the
big news groups to keep hush for 72 hours
pending determination and preparations is
very different from saying “tell no one
until we say otherwise, or else”.
Because everyone is expecting leaks and rumors
right from the get-go, and those actually
can cushion the impact to the public too,
wild speculation for a few days without formal
confirmation eases things in a bit.
In the long run, which in show context means
centuries or even longer, any effort at concealment
or shaping the narrative is going to erode
away so it might not matter much, but I think
people miss a lot of what the real responses
would tend to be.
First, yeah it is going to be the big news
item for a bit, and chat at every water cooler
and social media group for a time, with talking
heads on every news channel and lots of organizations
will be trying to figure out how it impacts
them, or how to adapt or profit from the change.
Figure on lots of sermons, from the literal
Sunday morning kind aiming to match up or
examine the theological impact, to the informal
variety you get from that one friend or guy
at the bar who has an authoritative opinion
on everything, and none of them really agreeing.
This is a good thing because if everybody
was giving identical interpretations, especially
if it was ‘wow, we are screwed’, that
would tend to drive wild behavior.
We often joke that after a week it would be
old news, but that’s not really the case
either.
This isn’t that celebrity that did something
scandalous, and people remember that years
later and still talk about it too.
For recent examples, think Covid-19 or the
war in Ukraine, neither was ‘old news’
a week later, because they were real news,
life changing stuff, not entertainment.
The Moon Landing wasn’t old news a decade
and a half later when I saw it over and over
again as a kid on MTV all the time, back when
that was a clip they’d play after commercials
before the next music video, back when MTV
played music videos anyway.
The big stuff doesn’t go away, and ironically
this is where saturation and apathy, which
we normally bemoan people getting, is actually
a saving grace.
We are wired up to get back to living life,
and that’s probably worth remembering next
time you’re upset at how people don’t
seem to care enough or forgot about something
that you think matters a lot.
It probably does, but if people didn’t do
that we would be crippled by every shocking
event and every death in our family.
For a species that had to accept death being
so commonplace that you would be counted a
success if you got to live long enough to
have gray hair and watch half your children
die before they had children of their own,
the ability to just keep going after a big
shock is a must have.
In that context discovering aliens would be
both big news that died off a lot after a
few weeks and that thing that dragged on for
years that people couldn’t stop talking
about even when and where you really wish
they wouldn’t.
So, my own advised plan for if we got a SETI
success would be a variation on keep calm,
all is well, it’s a big deal but be patient,
what we know has changed but the situation
itself has not, there’s no rush while we
decide what to do, life goes on.
Now, the exception to this is if that SETI
success is coming in the form of a flying
saucer landing at the UN or a message arriving
from their armada, demanding our surrender
and tribute.
In a situation like that you might as well
remain calm and try to act like an ethical
and courageous person, because if you’re
still alive after the fact, then it would
be nice to remember you had kept your act
together, and it would probably help you and
those around you at least a little.
If they blast the planet, it won’t really
matter if you were cowering in terror or nobly
staring death in the face, unless there’s
an afterlife, in which case the latter is
probably the better pick.
I know which I’d prefer, but you do you,
and honestly it's not likely to have any real
impact on the situation.
Unless they’re here in some sort of Valkyrie
like role picking the brave and culling the
weak or harvesting ideal subservient specimens
for a slave race.
And in neither is a prepared plan by us as
a civilization likely to matter at all, you
just go out and meet fate on your own terms.
Now, the good news is that while the Fermi
Paradox is still too mysterious to draw anything
like a certain opinion, what little evidence
we have, mostly by deduction, would indicate
that the most likely SETI successes of our
lifetime would either be an exoplanet hitting
the marks for biosignatures in its atmosphere,
as opposed to techno signatures or active
signaling – implying a world with life but
not advanced technology – or an astronomical
hit on a distant Dyson Swarm or collection
of them.
Picking up a few hundred Dysons in a group
might indicate civilizations expanding the
interstellar way for a while, then stopped
in favor of some alternative approach to progress
or died off and thus weren’t a threat to
us.
While picking up several galaxies together
that had gone dark into the infrared would
indicate the Grabby Aliens scenario was probably
in play, and that’s actually a good sign
for us, see that episode for details.
All in all though, the big takeaway plan for
SETI, for now, is simply patience.
Patience if, and until, it succeeds, because
we should always keep our eyes open out there,
and patience if SETI does succeed, in gathering
more information before acting on it.
That seems to be the theme for space, whether
it's SETI or multi-century journeys to new
stars, or decades of achingly slow progress
on returning to the Moon or getting to Mars.
Patience is a virtue, as it is in so many
other things, and while often frustrating,
it tends to pay off in the end.
If you’re interested in learning more on
SETI and Drake’s Equation, there’s a great
show, The Search for Life: The Drake Equation
over on Curiositystream.
Also, shortly after writing this episode I
got asked how I would go about doing SETI
and I thought that might make some good bonus
content for this episode over on Nebula.
As regular viewers know, we often do extended
editions of episodes over on Nebula and usually
I’ve done these as 5-10 minute add ons to
episodes on the back end replacing the sponsor
segments, as everything on Nebula is ad and
sponsor free, but the feedback is that folks
prefer the bonus content be readily available
and separate to make it easier to find so
we’ll start posting the bonus content as
their own companion vids on Nebula going forward.
That is one of the things I love about Nebula
- the largest creator-owned streaming service,
which I’m rather proud to have been a founding
member of, and which our audience helped succeed
- the platform is all built around serving
the creators and audience and adjusting as
needed, including great features like being
able to swap out videos with errors and actually
talking to live humans on our tech team, which
is something youtube never seems to care about.
If you’d like to join nebula and help support
our show while you’re at it, every new episode
of SFIA comes out there a few days earlier
and without ads or sponsor reads, and we have
bonus content released exclusively there at
least once a month.
We also have an audio only-version of our
show available there too, early and ad free,
as a podcast, as well as all of our extended
editions and bonus content like we’ll be
having today and some Nebula Exclusives like
Planets vs Megastructures and the Coexistence
with Alien series.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like The Drake Equation.
That lets us offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
Again, you can get Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15 a year, just use the link
in the episode’s description.
So today we talked about what if SETI succeeds
in finding alien civilizations and next week
we’ll flip things around and ask what if
we never get that message, because Humanity
is the first civilization to ever arise in
the whole Universe.
Then next weekend is our Scifi Sunday episode
on Interplanetary conflicts and Civil Wars,
and two Thursdays from now we’ll contemplate
how we might go about farming on new planets,
like Mars.
Then in three weeks we’ll look at the controversial
idea that our whole Universe might be a black
hole, and also if it would be possible to
retreat into black holes in this Universe
and live inside them.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
