We often discuss our future in the Asteroid Belt,  
and the glorious civilizations we 
might one day build there. However,  
it is but a pale shadow of its larger twin, the 
Kuiper Belt, out at the edge of the solar system.
When I was a kid, we were first beginning to 
seriously discuss the possibility that the  
Asteroid Belt might be as important to settling 
space as the Moon, Mars, or Venus, and indeed,  
I think it’s more critical to settling the solar 
system than Mars or Venus are, and second only to  
the Moon. However, if the Asteroid Belt is the 
gateway to colonizing our solar system, it is  
the Kuiper Belt, out past Neptune, that represents 
the gateway to the galaxy, and today we’ll discuss  
why that is and what that future looks like.
In order to do that, we first need to say what  
the Kuiper Belt is. The Kuiper Belt is a region 
out past the orbit of Neptune of many unattached  
minor planets and icy objects orbiting our Sun. 
We typically define it as a donut or torus-shaped  
region stretching from 30-50 astronomical units, 
also known as AU, where 1 AU is the distance of  
Earth from the Sun. As such, it contains a larger 
volume in it than the entire inner solar system. 
The name is in honor of Gerard Kuiper, 
the astronomer who discovered two of the  
bigger moons of Neptune and Uranus, and also 
helped identify landing sites on our own Moon  
for the Apollo Missions. He was also the Ph.D. 
Dissertation director for Carl Sagan and the two  
of them worked on Project A119, the US Air Force’s 
1958 plan to detonate a nuclear bomb on the Moon. 
Those are the highlights of a rather impressive 
career in astronomy and planetary science up until  
his death in 1973, but one that had nothing 
to do with the Kuiper Belt, except that many  
of the moons of Neptune might have been stolen 
from the inner edge of that belt. Indeed, at the  
time of his death there was only one known Kuiper 
Belt Object – Pluto itself – the second wouldn’t  
be discovered until 1978, Pluto’s largest moon, 
Charon, then the next to be discovered was Albion,  
a minor planet over 100 kilometers across, in 
1992. We estimate there are at least 100,000  
objects in the Albion size range out in the Kuiper 
Belt, objects over 100 kilometers in diameter,  
or 60 miles, whereas there are only about 
200 asteroids in the Asteroid Belt that size,  
which would mean there were roughly 500 times 
as many of those large objects, if not more. 
It is the loose rule of thumb that 
the number of objects of a given  
size follows a power law, that there are 
a lot more smaller objects than big ones,  
though we do seem to see bumps at 100 kilometers 
and 5 kilometers in diameter. As an example,  
while there are about 250 known Asteroid 
Belt objects 100 kilometers across or bigger,  
there are tens of thousands 
that are 5 kilometers or wider. 
If that distribution held in the Kuiper Belt 
too, though it probably does not or does so  
more weakly, we would expect tens of millions 
of objects 5 kilometers or wider out there,  
big mountain-sized balls of ice and rock. As a 
caveat, we tend to believe that asteroids in the  
Asteroid belt that are wider than 120 kilometers 
are mostly the battered but intact remnants of an  
original asteroid from the early solar system 
and that most of those which are smaller are  
scattered debris of those larger ones. Insofar as 
the Kuiper Belt is much larger and slower moving,  
it would stand to reason that collisions and 
fragmentation were less common. Nonetheless we  
estimate the Kuiper Belt to be anywhere between 
20 to 200 times as massive as the Asteroid Belt. 
Pluto is not the only large object out there, 
it was the discovery of many others that led  
to needing to ‘demote it’ from major planet 
status. The Dwarf Planets of Orcus, Haumea,  
Quaoar, and Makemake fall inside the Kuiper Belt, 
and except for Orcus, which is a bit smaller,  
each of those is larger than Ceres, the Queen of 
the Asteroid Belt, often argued to be planet 5,  
which makes up roughly a third of the asteroid 
belt’s mass, with another third made of around  
a dozen other large asteroids and the remaining 
third making up the millions of other bodies  
that are at least as wide as a football field.
We have way more categories for planets these  
days than major and minor, with dwarf being the 
first of several added categories as we learned  
more about exoplanets, but Pluto wasn’t the first 
planet demoted. Before we even discovered Neptune,  
let alone the Kuiper Belt beyond it, we had 
discovered Ceres and a handful of those other  
larger asteroids in the Asteroid Belt, and 
we didn’t even know there was a belt there.  
They got demoted to ‘minor planets’ after we 
started finding dozens of them, and that soon  
moved into thousands, and eventually resulting 
in us recognising that the Asteroid belt was  
divided into at least 3 distinct regions, and that 
there were tons of other asteroids elsewhere too,  
including 60 degrees ahead and behind of Jupiter, 
where there are two massive collections of  
asteroids named for the Trojan and Greek heroes 
of the Homer’s Iliad, and it later turned out that  
such collections on a smaller scale were normal 
for planets, and are generally called Trojans,  
at what we call the L4 and L5 Lagrange points, 
much as more modest rings are present for planets  
besides Saturn, whose immense rings include 
many football field-sized objects and larger. 
So, while focus on colonization of the solar 
system tended to focus on the terrestrial  
Major Planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and 
Mars plus Earth’s own large moon, we began  
seeing the Moons of the Gas Giant Planets, 
Jupiter and Saturn, and the two Ice Giants,  
Uranus and Neptune, as viable options too, if 
not classically terraformable due to low mass  
and distance from the Sun. But all those 
asteroids and other minor planets began  
looking like very good candidates too, in their 
countless thousands, and realizing the Kuiper  
Belt far outnumbered all those minor planets 
in the inner system changed the dynamics a lot. 
Now the problems with the Asteroid Belt are 
three-fold. First, even the nearest of them is out  
past Mars and gets weak sunlight, generally about 
one fifth to one tenth the sunlight Earth gets,  
with Jupiter’s Trojans being more like a 30th, and 
between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter’s Trojans,  
that is the overwhelming majority of minor planets 
in the inner system. As we discussed in the  
episode Colonizing Ceres, that actually is 
enough sunlight for agricultural purposes,  
there are no clouds and no night time attenuating 
sunlight in space, and many plants do not need  
noon-time sunlight to prosper, nor is it 
hard to provide very good insulation to  
agricultural or habitation environments on 
these asteroids, as your best insulator is  
vacuum and it’s already all around you, and 
airtight facilities are a necessity anyway. 
You can also set up a glass dome on the surface 
of a small asteroid to basically be a lens,  
or several of them, concentrating light on a 
smaller spot, or even construct a parabolic  
dish as thin as tinfoil behind an asteroid 
or tugged along by it on a tether, to focus a  
larger amount of light on that asteroid. Indeed, 
we even have a scaled-up version of this called  
a Parabolic Hab, that I will detail in a bit, that 
permits sunlight-enhancement to livable levels all  
the way out in the Kuiper Belt, where sunlight is 
a thousandth of what we’re used to here on Earth.  
But sunlight is a weak fuel for most asteroids, 
very few are closer to the Sun than Earth,  
and of the 30,000 known Near Earth Asteroids, only 
a minority spend much time closer to the Sun than  
Earth and usually only briefly, being on highly 
elliptical orbits. These gems are likely to be  
among the most valuable real estate and mining 
sites in the solar system in times to come. 
The second issue with colonizing asteroids and 
dwarf planets is Gravity, and that applies to all  
of them, regardless of location. Out of the many 
millions of these objects, only maybe a hundred  
even have high enough gravity to even qualify as 
significant. The most massive dwarf planet, Eris,  
which lies out in the Scattered Disc rather than 
the Kuiper Belt, still has less than a tenth of  
Earth’s gravity and is weaker than our own Moon’s, 
whereas Nemesis, the 33rd Largest known asteroid  
in the Asteroid Belt, at about 100 miles across, 
would have a gravity less than 1% of Earth’s, and  
an escape velocity also less than 1% of Earth’s, 
about three times faster than a car on a freeway,  
and it only gets lower thereafter, with 
most asteroids not even having enough  
gravity to hold you onto them if you jumped.
Now, this isn’t really a problem and indeed  
is also a plus for colonizing them. We can create 
a comfortable simulacrum of gravity by rotation,  
what we call spin gravity, and while that 
can be problematic on bigger objects where  
natural gravity would be pulling you in one 
direction while you spun perpendicular to it,  
causing a slight tilt to one side, or parallel, 
causing you to feel slightly heavier or lighter  
as it completed each rotation, this can basically 
be disregarded even on a place like Nemesis, again  
the 33rd biggest known asteroid in the main belt.
And while the Kuiper Belt is expected to hold many  
bodies bigger than that, they will generally be 
lower density ices rather than principally rock,  
and thus have lower gravity. So we can embed 
a rotating habitation drum, set to the gravity  
of our choosing, inside any of these objects, 
providing comfortable gravity for those living  
there, where it can receive both the protection 
of that rock or ice outside, and easy access to  
those resources for mining and refining.
As there is little gravity, mining those  
resources and shipping them elsewhere is easy, 
and a spaceship designed for moving between  
asteroids and off them needs little more than to 
be airtight, and could even run on a compressed  
gas rocket or by mechanically shoving off objects, 
opening the door to personal spacecraft that are  
lower-tech than the typical modern car. With no 
air drag for leaving, it takes less fuel to get  
off your typical asteroid than it would take to 
drive a car to the store. And for the most part,  
since the Sun and inner planets are all downhill 
in gravitational terms, you can throw mined matter  
back into the solar system at low cost.
The third issue with Colonizing asteroids  
though is that matter and resources you want to 
mine, because the entire Asteroid belt combined,  
even including the Dwarf planet Ceres, masses only 
about 3-4% of what our Moon does, 60% of which is  
in the 4 biggest asteroids, and Earth outmasses 
our moon by a factor of 80, so Earth itself has  
thousands of times the raw materials the entire 
asteroid belt has, and while the Kuiper Belt  
might outmass the asteroid belt by as much as 
factor of 200, that would still only be a tenth  
of what Earth has. Of course, if you ignore the 
Sun and the Giant Planets, Earth masses nearly  
as much as the entire remaining solar system 
combined, most of the remainder being in Venus. 
Now, if your goal is to disassemble every single 
planet for raw materials to build space habitats  
and an eventual Dyson Swarm, this matters, but 
in the meantime they represent the lowest hanging  
fruit for mining and supplying colonization. 
Scale is always deceptive in astronomical terms,  
as we can say some giant asteroid like Nemesis 
is still only a millionth of Earth’s mass,  
which can sound pitifully tiny, but in terms of 
mining or human scale, that is over a billion  
Great Pyramids worth of mass, and a million times 
more steel than we currently produce each year. 
Iron and carbon are quite plentiful in the main 
asteroid belt, we assume less so in the Kuiper  
Belt and Scattered Disc, as a percentage of mass, 
but they would still have plenty for building  
spaceships and space stations and power collectors 
and dishes and habitats out of. They also are very  
rich in water ice and ammonia and methane, those 
volatiles that are very important for life and  
filling the biospheres of those space habitats, 
or bio-cylinders or bio-rings, as the case may be. 
Either belt, main asteroid or Kuiper Belt, or 
for that matter, the Jovian Trojans or the Near  
Earth objects or Scattered Disc, are all 
pitifully tiny compared to the raw mass of  
the eight major planets, but it is vastly 
more accessible – especially for building  
in space – and each of those contains far more 
resources than mankind has ever mined or refined. 
Or even tilled, as if you crumbled up an asteroid 
like Nemesis and spread it over our whole planet,  
seas and all, it would represent about a meter 
deep of Earth. Which also means you can take an  
asteroid about that size or a Kuiper Belt 
object about that size and produce enough  
cylinder habitats to have a combined total 
internal living area roughly matching the  
entire Earth, and there’s a thousand times 
that mass and more in the Main Belt alone,  
and again we think the Kuiper Belt has 20-200 
times as much. So thousands of Earths worth of  
living area made from Asteroid Belt objects and 
potentially many times that with the Kuiper Belt,  
all before we even have to consider disassembling 
bigger moons or any of the Major Planets. 
It is hard to say whether it would be easier 
to ship a big comet in from the Kuiper Belt to  
put air and water in a space habitat built in 
orbit around Earth, or to ship it in from one  
of the Moons of the various giant planets, the 
big limitation is about your access to energy  
and how much of a rush you are in, and everything 
gets easier if you’ve got artificial fusion power  
or something even better, to the point that 
you might not care much about the energy cost  
to move a million tons of water or ammonia 
or methane around because the amount is so  
trivial compared to what you would get by fusing 
the hydrogen or deuterium inside that megaton. 
And usually discussing colonizing the outer solar 
system is in the context of a fusion economy.  
But let’s say for the moment that we never make 
that work economically. Can we still colonize the  
outer reaches of the solar system, those outer 
planets and the Kuiper Belt and Scattered Disc? 
And, incidentally, what is the Scattered disc 
and how is it different from the Kuiper Belt? 
For colonization purposes today they are 
basically the same and the boundary can  
be a bit hazy in astronomical terms too. As 
mentioned at the beginning, the Kuiper Belt  
is a donut or torus-shaped region in the same 
general plane around the Sun as Earth and most  
of the planets are, and the Asteroid Belt too. 
Think of the scattered disc as an expanding wide  
disc from the edge of the Kuiper Belt to the more 
spherical shell of the Oort Cloud. Essentially,  
space is rather evenly distributed in the 
interstellar void, but the area more dominated  
by the sun’s gravity and the solar system's 
initial angular momentum as it formed tends  
to flatten toward a disc, the ecliptic plane, 
which the planets generally are aligned to,  
and the further you get from the sun, the 
more things scatter away from being that  
disc-shaped scattering of objects, to being more 
of the spherical distribution of the Oort Cloud. 
There’s no real official limit on the 
Scattered disc and where it ends, more  
than 100 AU certainly, and to encompass all the 
outer planets beyond Pluto like Eris or FarOut,  
or the current title holder for most distant 
known object inside the solar system, FarFarOut,  
which might be a dwarf planet about 500 
kilometers in diameter, over 130 AU out,  
and orbiting the Sun every 700 years or so. It’s 
hard for us to see it precisely, but we think it  
might have a very eccentric orbit and actually 
cross inside the Kuiper Belt or even Neptune’s  
orbit, as Pluto does. Interesting factoid but 
Pluto was the eighth planet rather than the  
ninth from 1979 to 1999, returning to beyond 
Neptune’s orbit shortly before its demotion. 
Such being the case in the grand scheme of 
solar colonization, where Kuiper and Scattered  
Disc objects orbit once every century 
or longer, and many very eccentrically,  
you might have colonization and trade that 
began or peaked or dipped as they got closer  
to the sun - perihelion – as opposed 
to most distant from the sun, aphelion. 
Are they too far from the Sun though 
for us to live on without fusion? 
Channel regulars probably wouldn’t be surprised 
to hear me say no, and here are three ways we  
might colonize these spots without practical 
cheap fusion. First, we might simply use  
classic nuclear fission. There’s plenty of 
uranium and thorium out in the solar system. 
Second, we can beam energy out from closer to the 
Sun. It’s not the easiest thing in the world to  
focus a beam that far out though. Your typical 
laser pointer’s dot is apparently spread out  
to be about 4 miles wide by the time it would 
reach our moon, which is only a 400th of an AU,  
so a dot an AU away on, say, Mars or a near Earth 
Asteroid, would be around 1600 miles across…. the  
size of Pluto. It would be 40 times bigger 
than that by the time it reached Pluto too,  
more or less in the middle of the Kuiper Belt. 
It is possible to build an energy collector  
that big of course, it hardly needs to be 
very thick after all, just tin foil-thick. 
Our preferred medium for power transmission is 
usually microwaves, how tight a beam is focused  
is generally linear to wavelength, and microwaves 
are already a thousand to a million times the  
wavelength of the typical photon being emitted 
by the Sun. However, the spot also gets narrower  
based on the original beam size, bigger is better.
Your typical laser pointer beam is around  
a millimeter in diameter when it leaves the 
device, so one a full ten meters wide, or ten  
thousand millimeters, would be ten thousand 
times tighter, so instead of 4 miles on the moon,  
a couple feet or half a meter, and 
at 40 AU, about 1.6 miles across,  
or about 5 million square meters. This might be 
some large statite or lagite you built in near  
Mercury beaming out gigawatts to that station, 
something they owned, or they might be getting  
it from auction out of billions of different 
solar power collectors around the inner system. 
The problem is though, this distance is a very 
serious amount of juice that’s also tight. Even if  
that beam were down to 1000 watts per square meter 
when it arrived, akin to the intensity of noon  
time sunlight, that means it is transmitting 5 
gigawatts when it left the original platform at an  
intensity of 67 Megawatts per square meter…. Just 
a little brighter than the surface of the Sun. 
So, not something you want to stand in front 
of, and it would represent a potential hazard to  
pretty much anything in the inner system that 
crossed its path, though only things within  
a million kilometers or so would really need 
to view it as a death ray, and odds are that  
any ship moving around inside Mercury's orbital 
radius is already very mirrored-up to protect from  
solar heating. I’d say it's doable and probably 
reasonably safe, and this same power transmission  
apparatus is great for moving ships out to 
those places or even up to interstellar speeds. 
As we discussed in Colonizing Pluto, which again 
is roughly in the middle of the Kuiper Belt,  
a ship undergoing constant 1 g acceleration to 
Pluto at 40 AU, shoved by some beam would take  
18 days to get there, assuming it was planning to 
flip over and do a 1-g deceleration for the second  
half. If you were just flat out accelerating, 
13 days to go and at about 2.6% light speed.  
If you’re curious, 30 to 50 AU for the Kuiper 
Belt is 4 or 7 light hours of communication time,  
each way. Everything in the Kuiper Belt is 16-20 
days travel Time from Earth as 1-gee turn and burn  
maneuver, and a flat-out acceleration to the 
edge of the Kuiper Belt would get you to 4%  
of light speed, and 100 AU out, just over 6%.
The scattered disc keeps going beyond that,  
though once you’re out to 1000-2000 AU 
we’d be transitioning into the Oort Cloud,  
and at 2000 AU of constant 1-gee acceleration, 
that would be 90 days, and you’re going a quarter  
of light speed at that point, to reach something 
there at 1-gee, turnover is at day 64 at a speed  
of 18% light speed, and your arrive 128 days after 
departure, and a message there and back takes  
23 days. See our episode: Colonizing the Oort 
Cloud for more discussion of living out there. 
Back in the Kuiper Belt though, while I 
could see passenger ships moving that fast,  
it would necessitate either a longer trip back 
or a more expensive one where the return beam and  
laser for slowing you was generated at the site, 
with presumably a big loss in bouncing or catching  
and re-emitting that beam after transferring it 
into electricity and back into a laser. It is  
also hugely power wasteful. Which might be okay in 
that era though. Again, on your general path to a  
Dyson Swarm of habitats – or giant computers – you 
presumably eventually disassemble most planets,  
even the giants, or starlift the Sun for metals, 
as it has way more than every planet combined and  
indeed a billion times the mass of the asteroid 
belt, and around 10 million times the metals. 
In such an era, where collecting all the 
power of the Sun really only requires enough  
metal to make a paper-thin tinfoil 
ball around the Sun in near Mercury,  
and we would be talking about a mass of one 
of those larger asteroids at that point,  
though not necessarily one of the top tier 
like Vesta, maybe as little as 10^18 kilograms.  
During this phase, where lots of automation is 
probably in play and the human race is probably  
still well short of a trillion people or maybe 
low trillions. You could potentially have growing  
colonies on every asteroid already but have 
largely englobed the sun, especially its polar  
regions where the light isn’t hitting any objects 
in this solar system, just shining off to nowhere. 
As wasteful as it sounds, it might not be viewed 
as a very big deal, when every human alive,  
if given an equal share, might have a hundred 
terawatts of power production at their disposal,  
and you would need about 14 terawatts to 
push ten tons of ship, which would seem a  
plausible amount for a single person and their 
accommodations. Which would permit 27 trillion  
folks traveling this way at any given moment, if 
that’s all we used the power for, and entirely  
efficiently. If our population doubled every 
century, it wouldn’t be until 3200 AD before  
we might feel the pinch on this sort of travel 
method, which assumed really good automation for  
production but no fusion power or better options.
We would likely also see something more like an  
up-gunned Solar Moth, where power is sent out 
to the ship to be bounced into superheating a  
propellant acquired from the area. You can 
use this to move an entire comet inward by  
beaming power to it and absorbing it rather 
than reflecting it, gaining some momentum,  
but then using that power to superheat 
ice on the other side as its rocket flame  
toward the solar system, which far more 
than cancels out, hurling you inward. 
You could also use this to shove the object deeper 
into space too, as an interstellar craft. This is  
one option for interstellar colonization, as we 
looked at earlier this year in using Asteroids  
and Comets as Spaceships. You core out some rock 
or ice ball a couple kilometers across and use  
that as your shielding in space, and as your slow 
down fuel or propellant on arrival. It also saves  
some energy, as the escape velocity from the Solar 
System in the vicinity of Earth is 94,000 miles  
per hour or 151,000 kilometers per hour. Out 
there, the escape velocity is nearly nothing,  
so that’s a lot of velocity and fuel you’re 
saving from launching an arkship from there. 
Indeed, the escape velocity is so low that 
if you had to, you could create a rotating  
habitat colony inside one of these icebergs and 
give it a decent supply of fission fuel, uranium  
or thorium or plutonium, and let it use a classic 
ion drive to head into deep space. It might take  
10,000 years to arrive at a new world but 
you could run a decent-sized civilization  
inside that rock, either having stockpiles 
of raw materials, or mining them from it. 
You can use all that ice on an object from this 
area as propellant too, and move it much faster  
by hitting it with an energy beam from closer 
in-system as we discussed, and at the other end,  
to slow down, just have a smaller Orion drive 
vessel ready to launch from the big ship and  
run a bit ahead, slowing down using nukes 
and solar sails at the destination star,  
and converting itself into an energy beam to hit 
the mothership with. Fundamentally you can run  
that enormous ship at around whatever speed you 
can achieve as your exhaust velocity for those  
ices it is mostly made of, when dumped into an ion 
drive or propulsion system of your choice – see  
the Advanced Spaceship Drive Compendium 
episode for more discussions of the options. 
Or at a smaller scale, back home, just for more 
economically moving freight back into the system,  
probably powering an ion drive or 
even a flat out particle accelerator,  
to get the highest exhaust velocity you can for 
your propellant. Key notion though is that a piece  
of matter given speed by a photon you beamed in 
to serve as the propellant does better than that  
photon bouncing off the ship does by itself, it 
just represents a finite supply of propellant. 
If the energy beaming trick does not work 
though, impractical or too dangerous, and fusion  
also doesn’t become viable, and there aren’t 
ready supplies of uranium and thorium there,  
can we still run a civilization out in the Kuiper 
Belt and Scattered Disc? And if so, should we? 
This is where we get the Parabolic Hab, a space 
habitat that has an enormous parabolic dish  
behind it, as discussed in the Megastructure 
Compendium. To figure out its relative size,  
we just need to know how many AU the Habitat is 
from the Sun, as 1 AU is normal surface lighting  
for Earth and light falls off with the square of 
distance… also ignoring atmospheric attenuation.  
A parabolic dish 3 kilometers in radius at 30 
AU from the Sun is going to gather the same  
sunlight as one 100 meters in radius out near 
Earth. Basically 2-pi Hectares since you need  
a day and night cycle, or about 16 acres. 
Enough to feed a village worth of people,  
assuming you’re efficiently using your sunlight 
to grow plants in a climate controlled environment  
like a greenhouse. That dish is probably 
in the zone of a ton per square kilometer,  
and you need 28 tons of dish at that point.
Realistically you might build it heavier and  
you also probably want more power per person, but 
it is gathering about 40 megawatts of power. For  
those wanting to build out hypothetical ones 
and keep the math easy, at 37 AU from the Sun,  
a given square kilometer of parabolic dish is 
gathering 1 megawatt of power or sunlight, and  
again ought to mass something like a ton, thought 
that could go up a lot higher if you want thicker  
dishes or stronger structural members, I generally 
consider this sort of device to be recyclable,  
you build it out of hexagonal segments and 
let it get cut up and eroded by micrometeors  
and space dust, and just detach and replace beat 
up segments and recycle the remaining material,  
which might be aluminum, iron or even carbon. 
You could do it with ice as well but that’s  
going to be heavier, and your reflectivity 
or albedo on ice isn’t as high as a mirror so  
you need more. It would also likely ablate ice 
off the surface faster than you’d lose metal. 
But be it a ton or a hundred tons per 
square kilometer, it’s rather tiny  
compared to a rotating habitat, which might 
mass several megatons per square kilometer,  
and nothing compared to a classic planet. Earth 
masses almost 12 megatons per square *meter*,  
not kilometers, a million times more than a 
rotating habitat, and a billion to a trillion  
times what you need for a mirror. And if you 
find a nice rogue planet out there, as you might,  
even one way out in the periphery of the Scattered 
disc, 1000 AU out, where you need a million times  
more light-collecting surface than living area, 
that’s just then getting into the zone where you  
spend as much mass on your parabolic dish, or 
dishes, as on your space habitat’s living area,  
and still a tiny fraction of what a 
planet’s mass would be to light it. 
In terms of setup, you could do two 
counter-rotating habitats – which adds  
stability – as we often imagine for actual O’Neill 
Cylinders coming in pairs, and just move light  
from one to another so it’s light in one and dark 
on the other, though in practice I suspect you  
would having many different dishes, and that 
your ‘nighttime lighting’ would be going into  
mostly automated smaller agricultural stations, 
lighting those up, or your nature preserve or  
forest setup if you had one. If someone felt like 
rebooting the 1970 sci-fi film Silent Running,  
this would probably be the approach to use to 
avoid the plot holes and issues with that film,  
some of them anyway. You could have a habitat 
out in very deep space, far from any humans  
who might harm it, or to be fair, maintain it, 
being lit with an endless supply of sunlight. 
Not very stealthy incidentally, being a 
giant mirror. But in terms of habitats,  
if we assumed every last icy rock out there 
big enough to be turned into a spacehab was,  
we are probably looking at several billion 
giant icebergs in space, with some habitat in  
them ranging from a Kaplana-Sized habitat, buried 
in a snowball a kilometer across, to hundreds of  
nested O’Neill Cylinders in some continent-sized 
iceball. Those are spread over something like  
a million Cubic AU, your default Dyson Swarm 
is stuffing a quadrillion such habitats into  
about 4-6 cubic AU and is still considerably 
less population-dense than Montana. So you are  
very spread out in this area. 10 million miles or 
kilometers is probably the rough zone of distance  
between you and neighboring facilities 
at this point, the height of development,  
and that’s a lot of breathing room, millions 
of times the most rural places here on Earth. 
Your hab might be home to thousands or billions, 
or even one lone lunatic and his robot assistants,  
Huey, Dewey, and Louie, but a phone call to 
next door takes a minute to get a response,  
which isn’t bad, and unless you’re feeling flush 
on energy, probably days to weeks of travel time.  
You might actually have a mobile agricultural hab 
that used its excess sunlight to move it slowly  
between various other facilities out there 
and had shuttles swing out to grab small ice  
chunks to replace lost mass from selling produce.
You might be self-supporting and in isolation,  
running on fission or fusion or parabolic mirror 
or energy beam receiver or having a micro-black  
hole in the basement, and how stealthy this 
facility is depends on that. It might be a  
beaming relay to deep space, and an observatory, 
or a military radar outpost. It is a good place  
to be putting your forward defenses to intercept 
or fight anything coming in from another system,  
as just about any weapon you can imagine is 
safe to deploy out here, even self replicating  
killbots, as they’d run out of matter.
Fundamentally, it’s the hazy area between  
inside a solar system and true deep space, so I 
see it as a popular spot for those who want their  
elbow room but don’t want to leave civilization 
entirely. You are within a comm lag time of a day,  
to get messages to Earth and back, so email 
and social media still works fine, if we’re  
being realistic, and someone living there could 
go visit others inside the solar system. Also,  
if you are doing a lot of beam run ships, the 
Kuiper Belt is a good spot to place your beamers  
for pushing things from outside, as almost all 
traffic is in that plane of orbit. This allows  
very quick travel and I suspect we will see it, 
if not for freight, then for passenger ships. 
You can move even quicker if we’re considering 
uploaded minds and teleportation. It's also a  
magnificent place for doing computation, where 
colder is better for computing efficiency. You  
are out far enough that you are about as cold 
as you can get anywhere in the galaxy, so,  
if humanity or some successor AI creation of 
ours goes digital, this is the preferred place  
for your civilization, and you beam the energy 
out instead, from the Sun, or run your fusion  
plants or black hole generators here.
All in all, you can have some very  
big and bright civilizations out there 
in the Kuiper Belt, far from our Sun.
Talking about the Kuiper Belt and harvesting rocks 
or iceballs for resources no longer seems like a  
thing of an unimaginably distant future, as it 
seems like we are finally returning to space in  
a big and ambitious way and asteroid mining is 
likely to be part of that equation and sooner  
than later. This and so many other areas we used 
to think of as scifi, like AI, are now areas  
where more and more folks are making careers.
Maybe you’re thinking about a career in science  
and technology, or maybe you already have one. If 
so, as everyone in the tech world knows—if you’re  
not staying ahead by building new skills, you’re 
falling behind. AI isn’t the future—it’s now. And  
to be part of the next tech revolution, you need 
to understand the core concepts behind things like  
AI, neural networks, and machine learning. And the 
best place to learn them is at Brilliant dot org. 
Brilliant is the best way to learn math 
and computer science interactively,  
they have thousands of lessons — from foundational 
and advanced math to AI, neural networks, space,  
rockets, and more — with new lessons added 
monthly. Brilliant’s visual, hands-on approach  
is such an effective and engaging way to learn— 
it makes building a daily learning habit easy.  
Interactive learning has been proven to be 6x more 
effective than passive learning, like watching  
lecture videos, so Brilliant helps you learn by 
doing. Create programs with drag-and-drop coding,  
interact with charts and graphs, and play 
around with so many stunning visualizations. 
Brilliant makes it easy to build a daily 
learning habit, and you can try everything  
Brilliant has to offer, for free, for a full 30 
days, by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or  
clicking on the link in the description, 
and the first 200 people will get 20%  
off Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So for anybody who's been wondering how my surgery  
on my tongue went or how the International Space 
Development Conference was, no news as of yet,  
I intentionally recorded this before then, 
and virtually everything for June too,  
in case I lost my voice for a time. I’d imagine 
if anything went unexpected I’d have mentioned it  
over on our Community tab for this channel, and 
as a reminder we do post general updates there  
occasionally and it’s also where I post the 
image polls for potential upcoming episodes.  
We’ve generally been doing that twice a month on 
a Sunday of late, typically offering a choice of 4  
different episode topics and their draft cover 
art, the winner of which becomes an episode,  
and sometimes the runner up too. And we will be 
having one this weekend and had one this last  
weekend as well, that you can still vote for, 
again over on our Youtube SFIA Community Tab. 
So that’s it for today but June has barely 
started. Next week we will explore how  
we can build enormously tall and strong 
structures in Space Towers. Then it will  
be time for our scifi Sunday episode, and 
a return to the Alien Civilization Series,  
for a look at Higher Dimensional Aliens. And in 
two weeks, we’ll ask what it would be like if we  
or some other more advanced civilization sought to 
construct artificial afterlives. Then in 3 weeks  
we will celebrate SFIA’s 400th regular Thursday 
episode with a look at life in the year 2323 AD. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
