This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
 
For centuries now, we have pushed ever forward 
with science, unlocking new truths and new  
mysteries at every step… this journey has come 
to define our modern civilization… but what  
would happen if one day, that journey stopped, 
having no further place to travel forward to?
 
So, I’ve occasionally discussed in other episodes 
that there are fundamental reasons to think that  
we will get an answer to all the basic universal 
laws of physics and from there, all of science  
in general. And indeed, this might happen 
before we even get into the depths of space.
 
By default we tend to think that’s absurd, that 
there will always be more questions to solve.  
That science is like the mythic many-headed 
hydra fought by Hercules, which sprouted two  
new heads every time one was cut off. And indeed 
this might be the case for knowledge in general  
but for science itself there’s less 
of a reason to expect this and indeed,  
it is quite to the contrary. It's not that we’re 
creating ever-new questions, but that we’re  
speeding up the rate at which we answer a set and 
finite number of them. The hydra, in this case,  
may sprout two heads each time we cut one off, 
but it’s only got a thousand to sprout, and each  
new pair popping up from a stump just makes it 
faster and easier to whack two off. That the  
complexity of the universe is not infinite, and 
so there's only so much science to figure out.
 
To a society living several centuries 
into the explosion of knowledge and  
science that brought us to this modern 
time of technological omnipresence,  
the notion that this could ever stop 
seems almost impossible to believe.  
Humanity might blow itself to smithereens with its 
technology and thus end scientific exploration,  
but, run out of science? Inconceivable!
So, shortly before I wrote this episode,  
I’d mentioned this concept of ending science, 
by learning it all, and someone asked what a  
post-science civilization might be like. And I 
realized that even though I often say otherwise,  
that science might have a finite number of veils 
we can lift and end, I don’t really believe.  
I think most of us think science is never-ending 
and I presumably believe it deep down too, because  
otherwise, I would have already done an episode 
on the topic. Especially given that I often think  
of it as an event likely to occur within a few 
centuries or millennia, maybe even sooner, while  
I think of colonizing even our nearest neighboring 
stars as on the same sorts of timelines  
and the eventual galactic sprawl of civilization 
as not even getting fully underway for a million  
years or more. Usually, when we even consider the 
idea of maxing out our learning or technology,  
the assumption is that it’s the other way around, 
we get out in the galaxy at large in the next few  
centuries, like Star Trek, but an end to learning 
would still be millions of years from now.
 
I don’t want to spend too much time justifying 
this conclusion that science could end, so our  
handwave would be that a civilization might get 
so far along with its science that it is hitting  
big walls of ever-slower growth of learning or 
they are finding that new discoveries are mostly  
only being made by intelligences that are beyond 
anything human and the civilization either doesn’t  
want to embrace that path, or they are afraid they 
might destroy themselves if they learn any more,  
but they still might not opt to go 
anti-technological either, as we discussed  
in our Techno-Primitivism episode. Or that we 
are looking at a civilization that’s coming off  
a collapse and has got a mix of old technological 
artifacts and primitive tools they can still make,  
like we looked at in Techno-Barbarians.
So I want to examine 5 possible cases of  
Post-Science Civilizations 
or close to it, which are:
 
1. In a very distant future, eons from 
now, knowledge of science is completed.
 
2. In the relatively near future, we learn all 
the core rules of physics, and in the following  
centuries we get through the remaining questions 
in other sciences, possibly slowing as only more  
obscure and less important questions remain.
3. Scientific and technological progress never  
halt, but that the effort needed for each new 
step involves more and more effort and so we stop  
seeing a civilization where each generation’s 
technology is vastly different than before. 
 
4. Those new scientific mysteries have 
reached a point where only an inhuman  
and unfathomable mind can really progress at them, 
and this is seen as undesirable or dangerous,  
or perhaps when those minds are created 
they just leave or become unresponsive.
 
5. The civilization in question feels that 
pursuing any additional science is likely to make  
it nearly impossible to survive, as it just makes 
it way too easy for any anomaly to wreck them.  
One lone lunatic can mass-manufacture 
antimatter bombs in their basement,  
or science seems on the verge of proving 
that Free Will and Purpose are illusions,  
or it might simply be that they’re constantly 
dodging bullets from all the technological marvels  
they’re making and they think that, eventually, 
one of them is nearly guaranteed to get them.
 
Now, while I’ve listed five cases 
here, they can overlap I think,  
and we’re not really planning to 
discuss each case in detail today,  
it's more that you can envision a civilization 
around each and they would come in myriad forms.
 
One thing to understand is that virtually all 
physics that we do above the quantum scale  
and beneath the galactic scale, even today, 
is very nearly identical to what it was before  
Einstein arrived on the scene, and most of the 
core principles of biology, chemistry, and geology  
are things you could still learn if you had the 
textbooks on the topic that were available when  
Einstein was a student. We’ve pushed the frontiers 
very far indeed, but many areas haven’t changed  
all that much and there really is no reason to 
think that there’s an infinite number of physical  
laws and scientific mysteries to learn. As best as 
we can tell, all branches of science are emergent  
properties either of physics directly or from 
another field emergent from it, like biology  
being emergent from chemistry which is in turn 
emergent from physics, and from which medicine  
or neurology or sociology is emergent from.
But a firm knowledge of Quantum Mechanics isn’t  
really going to help you win at chess much, even 
though the game and everything used to play it  
are emergent properties of the basic 
physical realities of the Universe.  
However, there really are a finite number of 
strategies and tactics for that game, and indeed,  
a finite number of possible meaningful games since 
the game itself is finite in size, positions,  
pieces, etc. Knowing all the rules to chess, 
which takes little time for most folks to pick up,  
obviously isn’t the same as being a master of 
it. And so, when I say that knowing all the  
physical laws of the Universe, knowing all of 
those emergent systems on top of it would come  
later. Physics is the first field we would be 
likely to master, and then probably chemistry,  
as there’s a finite number of ways you can combine 
the finite number of elements with each other  
and under various conditions of pressure, 
temperature, and so on, but it wouldn’t  
seem possible to do all those conditions 
without knowing all physical options first.
 
If we live in a finite Universe, it stands 
to reason that the rules governing it must be  
finite. Alternatively, an infinite-sized Universe 
doesn’t imply infinite rules. It may be that there  
are unknowable numbers of alternate realities and 
multiverses, each with different rules, but we  
have no way of proving or experimenting with those 
other places yet. If we do, that changes things,  
and a complete knowledge of science might 
also include the ability to change the rules  
or make new places with different rules.
Whichever the case, we have no strong reason  
to think science is unending, and yet, we 
really are very convinced that’s the case,  
and so it makes me instantly worry. Extreme 
confidence as a society that something is true,  
potentially leaves that civilization vulnerable 
to having that truth kicked out from under them,  
and their whole worldview with it. 
Many things can destroy civilizations,  
some utterly mundane and expected, but extreme 
worldview shifts are often the true juggernauts,  
crushing and smashing all before them, and I think 
a civilization utterly convinced at a root level  
that science will always keep turning 
up new things and inventing new widgets,  
then finding out that wasn’t the case, would 
undergo just such a very big shift, equal to  
or maybe greater than those caused by things like 
cars or computers or civil rights and voting. I  
think it would be a Singularity or maybe an actual 
Out of Context Problem, the terrifying big brother  
of a Black Swan that we discussed in that episode, 
and would represent a Fermi Paradox Solution. 
 
Indeed, as we discuss this today, I’m going 
to argue that it maybe should be added to  
our short list of Late Filters of the Fermi 
Paradox, those stages a civilization such  
as ours still has to pass through, as opposed 
to all the many prior filters we got through  
between our galaxy and world forming and 
us inventing the first rocketship.
 
Now, starting with our first case, that, in a 
very distant future, eons from now, knowledge  
of science is completed. That doesn’t help us 
much with the Fermi Paradox; it is essentially  
the default point of view, we either assume 
knowledge is infinite and science along with it,  
or that science at least might be finite 
but will need uncounted millennia to solve.  
Such being the case though, it rather implies 
that classic sci-fi situation where you just  
keep making ever better engines for spaceships 
that let you move more ship, and faster, which  
lends itself to a rapidly settled galaxy and also 
begs the question of where all these leviathan  
civilizations are and what happened to them. 
As this is the classic sci fi and space opera case  
and the one probably most envisioned in Fermi 
Paradox discussions, we can largely gloss over it,  
and it often ends with something like an Ascension 
Scenario, where the aliens go to a higher plane  
of existence to continue their pursuits, having 
solved everything of interest in this Universe  
and ready to move to the next one. Or that 
they delve too deep and go mad or unleash  
some ancient terror that consumes them. See 
our episodes: Gods & Monsters, Godlike Aliens,  
and Aloof Aliens for more discussion of that 
sort of scenario, but it comes down to handling  
the difficulty of a civilization that’s reached 
that level by basically moving it somewhere else,  
out of play, either disinterested in pursuing 
resource acquisition as we might expect them to,  
and disinterested in communicating with, or even 
acknowledging other lifeforms in the universe,  
or are simply bound by non-interference 
rules, laws and regulations,  
or they have been wiped out by either themselves, 
or a sudden unexpected scientific discovery,  
or by some kind of cyclical natural event that 
we haven’t been around long enough to observe.
 
Their goals no longer resemble our goals 
and thus, if they remain at all, we can’t  
spot them by obvious signs of their activity 
because they’re not doing the obvious stuff.  
It does still remain a problem if we assume the 
Rare Intelligence camp of the Fermi Paradox is  
valid and that we’re the Firstborn civilization 
in this region of the Universe though,  
an example of a Grabby Alien Civilization or 
K4 Civilization, our topic for next week. 
 
So, over the next few centuries or millennia,  
we master every world in the galaxy and since 
our science exceeds what modern theory permits,  
we presumably can create things that make even the 
greatest of Megastructures we discuss on this show  
look petty and small. And since some of those make 
use of entire galaxies to achieve their goals or  
could move galaxies and harvest and consume whole 
stars to fuel themselves – all using only modern  
science - we should assume that a civilization 
whose science keeps expanding constantly  
for millions of years has had the time 
and power to achieve even greater feats.  
Probably those that make a Dyson Sphere 
seem as trivial as a child's terrarium.
 
Or perhaps not, we shouldn’t assume 
an ever greater knowledge of science  
implies ever greater power and control, that 
really is not how this has worked thus far,  
where we still use engines functionally similar to 
the ones we had centuries ago, using fuel to make  
steam or hot gas to shove things, and really 
only solar panels and thermocouples create  
power differently and they also use principles 
discovered by folks who are all long-since dead. 
 
This needs emphasis perhaps; knowing the complete 
rules of a system does not mean you’ve mastered  
that system. You can know all the rules of chess, 
football, basketball or poker and still have folks  
learning new techniques and strategies centuries 
later, especially as dynamics shift. Shoes with  
better cushions or cleats on them, just from 
something like rubber being discovered or  
improved, can shift the dynamics of the game 
of football a lot but the rules didn’t change,  
and that’s basically what physical laws are too. 
That’s more of what we mean with our second case,  
that we discover all the laws of physics and how 
the Universe works and maybe even this century,  
so that before the first interstellar spaceship 
arrives at our first colony to be formed,  
we already know all the rules 
of how the Universe works.  
I suspect this is the case too, that while 
we have many more complex emergent systems  
branching off from physics, that your baseline 
astronomy, particle physics, relativity,  
quantum, and probably chemistry will be 
settled out in a few more lifetimes. 
 
What does this civilization look like?
Well, I suppose we need to ask if a  
post-science civilization is one where all science 
is complete or all technology is too, or even if  
all available scientific mysteries are currently 
solved or in the unsolvable bin. As an example,  
things like string Theory and Multiverses, popular 
as they are in sci fi and speculation in general,  
lack any proof for or against them, and have only 
a very few vague notions as to how they could be  
tested in this Universe. Often, those suggested 
experiments are leviathans of effort and time.  
As an example, we might find that we have a new 
particle in our theories but to test it would  
require a supercollider a few thousand light 
years across, powered by several thousand stars  
and needing such precision to the collider’s 
track that we must empty out an enormous torus  
of space outside the track, many light years wide, 
of anything even as big as a modest asteroid that  
might perturb the particles gravitationally. 
A civilization might decide that is a good cause,  
but to get the resources to be able to build 
that without throwing everything they have at it,  
to build something of that scale on the 
proportional resources of a modern supercollider  
to modern civilization, might require a fully 
colonized swath of space that’s ten thousand  
light years across, that’s sufficiently settled 
and built-up that, most of those billion or so  
star systems don’t mind footing a bit of the bill 
and inconvenience. Thus, that’s the sort of thing  
that might happen in the year 100,000 AD, if we 
can get ships out into space able to move 10% of  
light speed. The construction time might be tens 
of thousands of years too and the first experiment  
on completion might need ten thousand years just 
to let the first set of particles run the track. 
 
On getting that data, it might be that 
the answer is clear, easy and complete.  
Done, one simple paper, simultaneously 
written by some physicist in each system,  
independently, a few weeks after the signal 
carrying the experimental data reaches them.  
And then back to another hundred thousand years 
of waiting while the next anomaly is found and  
experiment is suggested and then thousands of 
years are taken for the paper suggesting that  
experiment to rattle around through the galaxy 
to gather interest, discussion, and funding.
 
Let's be blunt, this is a civilization where 
nobody does science full time anymore and  
honestly isn’t one where you probably have a lot 
of full time instructors of science at the higher  
levels. Let me give an example case, it’s the 
year 3000 at the University of Mordor on Charon,  
Pluto’s largest moon. Humanity numbers some 
100 Trillion people, all but maybe a billion  
of which live in this solar system, closer to 
the Sun than we do, at Pluto. Our University got  
its funding principally to explore the ice and 
cryovolcano effects of the Pluto-Charon system,  
and three centuries after they got that mandate, 
they are still putting out papers. Indeed since  
this is the year 3000, many of the staff are the 
same folks as first were hired for the job, being  
biologically immortal. Other than new researchers 
or assistants, nobody comes here to learn from us,  
we do videos and papers on the topic – or possibly 
straight brain upload packets – and even the 100  
million or so folks living in and around Pluto, 
many of them with IQs well above 200 on the modern  
scale and curious and scientific by nature, 
do not particularly care about our research.
 
So, it’s not a full time job – I mean 
why would it be? It is the year 3000,  
if you’re not post-scarcity by now, then odds 
are, your civilization is some dystopian wreck  
or the extinguished ruins thereof. It is entirely 
possible that humans of the year 3000 aren’t much  
different from the way they looked in the year 
2000 or 1000, but odds are, you’ve got bits  
and pieces of machinery glued into you in some 
fashion. The typical person probably is at least  
as smart as Einstein and probably has had access 
to learning tools that make anything we’ve got now  
look ham-fisted. I don’t know what someone with an 
IQ of 200 at age 200 is like in terms of knowledge  
and interest but the odds are that is on the dumb 
and young side of what will be around then. 
 
Post-scarcity civilizations probably aren’t 
prone to our typical view of hedonism either,  
loaded to the gills on various forms of the seven 
deadly sins, and lounging in utter sloth. We get  
overweight and lazy as a result of more calories 
in than out or having low energy levels, and more  
likely than not, someone of the year 3000 has 
an Olympic athlete’s body, if not a superhero’s,  
and has probably been raised by something 
that would make modern helicopter parenting  
and intense mentoring look negligent. So, we’re 
not talking about a civilization wherever everyone  
stopped doing science because they spent all 
their time glutting themselves on base pleasures  
and never got educated, we’re talking about a 
society where the baseline education of most folks  
is the equivalent of a modern Ph.D. in every 
field we’ve got, and they just can’t make a  
full time job out of science because it’s 
slowed down and there are so many folks in  
every field and they don’t need a full time job. 
I think you’d still have noted experts on topics,  
but with a lot less formality than today, our 
current University and Academia setup for that,  
already seems a bit unstable going forward and 
I’ve no great insight what that will look like  
next century, let alone next millenia, but peer 
review and accreditation get very tricky when you  
start adding in century-long light lags between 
planets. We’ve got a telescope a thousand light  
years away, it transmits back to Earth and many 
other places, and some colony 1500 light years  
away from Earth, but 900 light years from that 
telescope, is responsible for figuring out the  
theory a century ahead of when Earth hears, 
and its trillions of scientists figure it out,  
name it, and re-broadcast it to the civilization 
extending out from it in a rough spherical blob.  
And maybe ten thousand years later, after most 
folks are dead or had moved on to other interests,  
someone finally properly sorted out who 
did what and when, and duplicated it,  
or first figured it out or figured it out tenth, 
but the fastest after getting the original data.
 
Fundamentally, this is not a very incentive-heavy 
environment for science, and realistically,  
society isn’t begging them for new tech to 
make very easy lives even easier. Odds are  
everyone is very curious still, but the driving 
methods of effort and funding will have shifted,  
and as we get problems that might need trillions 
of scientists, laboring for thousands of years to  
make any progress, I just don’t think it would be 
as big a draw to folks looking for a challenge.  
We have an image of scientists challenging 
the impossible but scientists tend to get  
exhausted and discouraged by no progress and 
peers telling them it's a waste of time.
 
These things get worse if you have 
accelerated consciousness too – indeed,  
I suspect just being bigger brained would lend 
itself to impatience, even if greater courtesy  
and willpower might override that, but when we 
contemplate civilizations living the transhuman  
or uploaded mind speed superintelligence 
life, where the augmentation is aimed  
at simply speeding up how fast we think and 
experience things, then light lag becomes brutal.  
A scientist who experiences time at 
100x faster inside their virtual world  
than a modern human currently experiences 
time, still has to wait a thousand years for  
that signal to come from that telescope, but 
to them it feels like 100,000 years instead.  
Alternatively, they can create and model entire 
simulated universes of amazing complexity in that  
virtual environment. Hypothetically, a scientist 
might freeze themselves to wait for results,  
and if that were commonplace it might make for 
a different twist on post-science civilizations,  
a hiatus-science civilization perhaps.
Now, faster than light travel – depending on how  
it works – obviously changes all of this, as would 
portals to other planes, dimensions or timelines,  
but we don’t know those exist and have no current 
theories on even determining how to discover that,  
and that may continue forever, that’s 
the whole End of Science thing,  
Light Speed and Entropy just get stuck in there 
with no plausible hope of ever overcoming them.  
If they are rigid laws, unbendable, and no other 
Universe is available, then you might have folks  
keep up the faith even millions of years since 
the last truly new discovery, but it's unlikely  
to be viewed as we view it now, a thing that 
happens so often it will surely happen again. 
 
And, a post-human society of super-geniuses 
might be very bad at believing things that are  
more ‘matters of principle’ than they 
are evidence. We often worry that if  
things like Free Will and Purpose are just 
illusions and conceits of us. If they are,  
then such civilizations might be very bad at 
lying to themselves and turn hyper-nihilistic.  
Everybody dies of despair or suicide except for 
the ones who turn into mad hedonist mixtures of  
Dark Eldar and Melniboneans, sacrificing people 
to Slaanesh while always seeking ever crazier  
and darker means of satisfying themselves, 
like drug addicts. Something like an end  
of Science might look like that, especially 
as new technological innovations dried up,  
or it might just be a culture that is more like 
we were several hundred years ago that just didn’t  
have that focus. Those folks were not short of 
mental challenges, riddles, or puzzles though.
 
We all play games, puzzles are 
probably common with this audience,  
I like crosswords and logic puzzles and my 
wife loves Sudoku and logic puzzles too,  
and she is one of those people who stubbornly 
won’t look at the back of the book for the answer,  
but I’ll do that, especially on crosswords, if 
it is some word I know I’m not going to know.  
Difference of styles, I mostly like 
puzzles as a method of doing brain warm  
up and stretching with my morning coffee 
to get me ready for working on this show,  
so speed matters, and it's just practice not a 
challenge. Neither one of us is under any illusion  
that us solving those puzzles helps improve 
humanity the way new scientific breakthroughs do,  
and somebody made that puzzle and mass-produced 
it so we’re hardly the first ones solving it. 
 
Same thing, when I’m reading old science from 
back before even my mentor’s mentors were alive,  
I’m not expecting to get deep revelations out 
of that, just a perspective from a different  
time and sometimes it’s a helpful aid to me, 
given what I do for living. And this love of  
puzzles and riddles and challenges long predates 
any formal science, and I think it would exist  
long after the end of science and technology 
too, and would probably fill that need for folks  
pretty well. Most humans aren’t scientists, 
even most curious and puzzle-loving ones.
 
Knowledge isn’t necessarily infinite either, 
but it’s a much bigger realm than just science,  
and it really wouldn’t seem likely anything of 
even vaguely human mind and duration could ever  
run out of knowledge. You could spend a thousand 
years just reading everything printed on science  
in the typical University library, as they were 
at the turn of the century when I used to wander  
the bookshelves at my own college, being amazed at 
how many rows were given over just to my own field  
of physics. It's been growing ever since and none 
of us really expect that to end anytime too soon.
 
Now, a super-intelligent mind might get 
bored way faster and easier than the average  
human mind tends towards. There may be an 
infinite number of books you could write,  
but the fiftieth fantasy series you read that 
seems to mimic and differs only superficially  
from Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings or the 
classic King Arthur tales, gets pretty boring,  
and a supermind might get bored with it even more 
quickly than we do. We shouldn’t assume that it  
definitely scales up, that superminds can make 
puzzles and fiction that would occupy them as well  
as contemporary material can occupy us. That could 
go either way, that superintelligences can create  
exponentially more new and interesting things 
than they can all absorb without getting bored,  
or that they can’t create them enough 
to prevent each other getting bored.
 
Now, one thing that comes to mind, I said a 
moment ago, it – science - has been growing  
ever since I was a student and none of us 
really expect that to end anytime too soon,  
but what if it did? What if there was literally 
not a single new discovery after today?  
Just finish up a few projects and data and 
say “Oh, that’s where dark energy comes from,  
and that’s what a dark matter particle is” or 
“that’s why we can never get the answer to X,  
Y and Z question”, and then, done! 
No new solutions or answers.
 
Imagine a world in which, as of today, no new 
scientific discoveries were ever made. Firstly,  
it would likely take a few generations before we 
started to fully believe it was done-done. I mean,  
I can talk all day about the end of science and 
in our lifetimes, but even as I say it, and with  
good reasoning at my back, it’s an ethereal 
concept I view as unreal. So I can’t see it  
causing a rapid apocalypse, folks would just shift 
from turning our brightest minds to new research,  
to principally technological innovation and then 
to other fields of endeavor. A cabinet maker  
in their garage utilizes tools and techniques 
mastered long before they were born, to make a  
piece of woodwork that’s probably nearly identical 
to those that many others have made , and is  
not moaning in despair about a lack of creative 
options and lacking a feeling of accomplishment,  
ditto the gardener or chef. But it’s not likely 
to magically end in one moment, and with fewer  
accomplishments in science every year, I think 
you would see a slow drain-off of folks, over a  
few centuries probably. Some might be left behind 
against a perceived need to always keep trying to  
find something new, and I’d imagine some would 
view it as a ceremonial role and others would be  
half-crazed followers of any random newly-reported 
phenomena, trying to stir up some hype for it. 
 
That’s a sad way to think of science ending, but 
more likely, it would be a posthuman era, but  
there would likely still be a handful of dedicated 
old masters of the field who kept their eyes open,  
and met occasionally, to check if anything new 
was in, or if the textbooks needed revising,  
so to speak. They’re the originals not 
great-great-great-grand students of the  
last scientist to produce real new science.
A sudden end to science would be more like in our  
cases 4 and 5, where that civilization is fearing 
that any new science is going to wreck them,  
and they then ban science, or 
alternatively, it did wreck them,  
and Earth’s entire surface got turned into a 
glowing hot radioactive cinder. Or more anyway,  
Earth is already a glowing hot radioactive cinder 
with a thin cool skin of life wrapped around it. 
 
Now, we’ve got plenty of fictional examples 
of cases where something like this happened,  
Ray Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451 or Walter 
Miller’s A Canticle for Leibowitz come to mind,  
but while they are good stories; contemplating 
post-apocalyptic scenarios, I didn’t find  
either to be super-realistic, and they don’t 
contemplate a civilization calmly and rationally,  
choosing an end to scientific 
research because in sci fi,  
any faction opposed to scientific research 
are automatically, by default, crazy fanatical  
Luddites. It is harder to make that case if 
you have a civilization in which simplistic AI,  
robots, automation, and 3D printing have basically 
brought you to post-scarcity, with folks easily  
able to feed themselves and enjoy many luxuries, 
and do so sustainably for billions of years,  
where folks really only need to work maybe 
five hours a week, but most opt to do more,  
where disease and old age are basically things 
of the past and nobody lacks for any real need. 
 
In that society, and that’s probably things 
circa the year 2100 AD, if someone points out  
that the newer science is having very marginal 
improvements to people’s standard of living,  
both materially and in more existential respects, 
but that terrifying and harder-to-control dangers  
keep appearing on the edge of exploration – 
Superhuman AI they don’t need, posthumans who  
might view them as insects, nuclear bombs people 
might make in their basements, weird space or time  
bending stuff, then maybe when they say “How shall 
we fix this?” someone would say “Maybe we need to  
stop doing any new science or at the least cut 
back on it?” and when they’re done exclaiming in  
horror at the concept, they might say “Actually, 
maybe we should.” I could really see that,  
but I don’t see that happening out of the 
blue and I’d have difficulty seeing that  
appearing in the form of immediate total bans 
and witch hunts, though those could follow if  
some faction ignored that rule and nearly killed 
everyone with crazy robot armies or something.
 
I could see this happening though, as we are not 
in times past, any rule we passed limiting further  
development is not going to disappear in the ages 
of time, we have digital records and easy backups,  
everyone will remember the why and how. So, 
civilizations that basically pause at 22nd century  
technology might not ever lift that pause and 
might not really be well set up for interstellar  
colonization or even inclined to do it. We talk 
about getting all your eggs out of one basket,  
but in truth, there really is no plausible natural 
disaster that can hit a solar system, or even a  
single and alert planet, that can wipe it out, 
except intelligent ones. Fear aliens or AI,  
not asteroids. And the reality might be, or be 
seen to be, that spreading colonies to countless  
other stars is more likely to spawn dangerous new 
threats to your civilization than is justified by  
any minor and improbable risk averted, that just 
colonizing your own solar system doesn’t avoid. 
 
Also, giant space telescopes and transmitters 
and dishes of the kind we discuss for talking  
across the galaxy to aliens don’t serve much 
point, you assume that like yourself they  
either aren’t interested in new technology or they 
are and thus represent a threat, because they’re  
recklessly playing with science and might spawn 
some galactic menace before killing everyone,  
including themselves, so why bother talking 
to them at all? However strange they may be,  
they're not likely any weirder than some of 
the things you’ve dreamed up in virtual worlds  
and giving them your name and 
address in exchange for theirs  
is potentially a big risk for little tangible 
reward. And if that’s the case, it might be a  
valid Fermi Paradox Solution, better than many 
I can think of and maybe even a top-ten entry.
 
But in the end, I think that a post-science 
civilization is probably the one that most  
intelligent life-forms live in. Most of our 
distant colonies as we settle the galaxy and  
beyond, aren't going to be focused on science 
because they will assume that the vast dyson  
swarms of the Inner Sphere near Earth will already 
be working on any new bit of science, and be much  
better equipped and with greater/cheaper 
resources available than they have,  
and indeed quite likely to have already solved 
it before those colonies had even heard of it  
themselves, just due to light lag. This is likely 
what most of humanity outside maybe the next few  
millenia will be like, busy, and pro-technology, 
but not focused on doing new science themselves,  
and so probably not too unlike our own cultures 
of the past, where things still changed,  
but the culture didn’t revolve around the idea 
that everything is redone every generation. 
 
It becomes a society where folks are probably more 
willing to build something that lasts ten times  
longer but costs five times as much, which we tend 
to be reluctant to do in this era of entirely new  
technology every generation. But I don’t think 
it would be a stale society, void of progress and  
stagnant or hedonistic, anymore than those in our 
past were, and many prior cultures or communities  
appear not to have added any new technology, 
let alone science, to humanity’s pool. Though,  
likely many did do at least some, and it just 
hasn’t gotten recorded, and what counts as science  
can be debated. Nonetheless, many were amazing 
and vibrant peoples and places all the same,  
so we shouldn’t assume a post-science 
civilization is a bad place to be. 
 
Indeed, as a civilization that’s really only been 
heavily science-focused for a relatively short  
time, odds are pretty good that we’re the unstable 
anomaly, and that while learning is probably  
eternal, a civilization focused on science is a 
brief period between when a civilization thinks  
stars are just points of light or distant gods, 
and when it has settled them all, and dwells  
around them for billions of years to come. 
And those might be glorious civilizations,  
shining as brightly as the stars they’ve come 
to surround, but I’m glad to be living now  
when there’s so many mysteries still to answer 
about those stars and so many other enigmas.
 
 
As we looked at today, it is possible one 
day we’ll run out of science or abandon it,  
but I wouldn’t bet on it anytime soon, and 
in the meantime a strong knowledge of math,  
science, and computer science is of 
uncalcuable worth in our civilization.  
Odds are pretty good if you’re watching this 
show, I don’t have to convince you that’s true,  
but learning math and science 
can be intimidating to many  
and the key to learning it is good explanations 
with handson examples and practice, and that’s  
why I’ve been recommending Brilliant for years 
for folks looking to level up their knowledge. 
 
They’ve not only been a good sponsor for this 
show since its early days, they’ve been a good  
partner to work with, and helped us a lot as 
a production, and a lot of other shows too.  
I don’t know of any other show sponsor I’ve heard 
so much positive feedback from other show creators  
for just being great to work with, and they can be 
a great partner on your own learning journey too,  
and that seems to be the overwhelming 
consensus from folks who’ve signed up  
with them over the years and let me know how 
it helped them or a family member to learn. 
 
Brilliant makes it easier for anyone to 
learn, be it the basics or advanced materials,  
they have thousands of lessons, with exclusive 
new content added monthly, and their focus  
on interactivity and making learning fun just 
throws out the old paradigm of boring textbooks,  
like we try to do here on this show.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace,  
learn on the go, and learn something new, all 
while helping support our show. To get started  
for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur 
or click on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
 
So we still have one more regular Thursday episode 
this month, on the Grabby Aliens perspective  
of the Fermi Paradox, and what Grabby Aliens 
are and if we will become an example of them  
and if they are a Kardashev 4 Civilization. 
First though we have our Monthly Livestream Q&A,  
Sunday September 25th at 4 pm Eastern time, where 
my wife and co-host Sarah and I will be taking  
your questions live from the chat. After both of 
those it is into October to look at the idea of  
colonizing planetary rings, like Saturn’s, and 
if life might be able to evolve in such places.  
Then we’ll ask the question of what we do if all 
these options for space travel never pan out, and  
we are stuck here on Earth, and then we’ll have 
our Scifi Sunday episode to look at what happens  
if space travel does indeed pan out and what 
strange alien environments we might encounter.  
Possibly on your own Personal Spaceship, 
which we’ll look at on October 20th.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
