This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Humanity has a way of altering and even severely
damaging our environment and climate,
and it would be nice to be able to avoid doing
that,
or at least mitigate the problems it causes.
So let’s see what’s in our toolbox.
So today we’ll be looking at ways to mitigate,
reverse, or even amplify climate changes using
only near-term technologies, which for SFIA
usually means we either have the tech today
or it is comfortably on the radar.
If you’re a channel regular, you won’t
be surprised that we won’t be focusing entirely
on carbon dioxide based climate change or
even just man made approaches, and you also
won’t be surprised that a lot of the solutions
we discuss involve mega-engineering we’ve
looked at for terraforming other planets.
For those of you who are new to the channel,
a lot of the concepts we discuss can seem
rather over-the-top at first glance, but are
always rooted in hard science.
Or in short form, welcome to SFIA, where we’ll
cheerfully discuss how to use hydrogen bombs
to save the environment.
Now climate change is inherently a politically
controversial topic and we’ll be doing our
best today to stay as far away from that as
possible.
So we’ll enter this episode with only three
assumptions regarding it.
First, that climates change naturally and
that you might not always like those changes
and may want to minimize them.
Second, that humans can change an environment
through accident or intentional effort, if
you don’t believe that, stick around.
Third, that minor changes to complex systems
like our overall global ecosystem can have
all sorts of unanticipated consequences.
We’ve gotten much better at modeling those,
but at least for now, precise weather and
ecological modeling is unavailable to us.
I believe those are all universally accepted
by every faction with an opinion on climate
change.
A result of our third assumption, that our
climate and ecology are rather chaotic, is
that pretty much no matter what we do it’s
going to have unanticipated side effects and
sometimes even the most minor tweaks can have
massive unanticipated consequences.
Just as an example, even something as small
as switching to a type of lawn grass that
was lighter or darker to cover 1% of Earth’s
surface, so that it reflected or absorbed
just 1% more sunlight, would result in the
Earth absorbing or reflecting away about 1/10,000th
more light than now.
It sounds small, but that is 20 terawatts
of energy, which for comparison is 10 times
humanity’s total power consumption and parallel
to the rate of heat energy released by a powerful
hurricane.
I think we’d all agree that’s nothing
to sneeze at.
It’s also about the amount of power needed
to produce about 12 billion tons of aluminum
a year, one of our more energy intensive metals
to make.
On that note, that amount of aluminum rolled
at a 20 nanometer thickness, what we envision
for aluminum solar sails, would cover a bit
over 200 billion square kilometers of area,
enough to entirely wrap Earth 400 times over.
Remember that for later on.
Small things can have huge effects on the
environment, and since small things are usually
cheaper and easier to do, they tend to be
the preferred approach for geoengineering
projects.
There’s just one problem, small things can
have huge effects on the environment, including
unpredicted ones.
We choose today to look at the big brute force
approaches not because they’re surgical,
but because we can’t perform surgery anyway.
We simply lack the atmospheric, climatic,
and ecological modeling capacity, even with
our best modern computers, to predict what
little changes will do.
On the other hand, raw brute force, which
can obviously have unpredicted consequences
too, has a certain simplicity to getting the
job done.
If your tweak had big unexpected consequences,
you can brute force it back to where you want,
which surgical approaches don’t generally
permit.
Most of our climate change scenarios, natural
or unnatural, cyclic or caused by things like
volcanoes or asteroid impacts, do it through
brute force of tinkering with how much light
we get down here on the ground and how slowly
that light turned into heat gets radiated
away.
This gives us three basic approaches, either
remove the problem causing that effect – such
as cutting down on how much carbon dioxide
we produce or removing that effect – such
as removing that carbon dioxide from the air
and sea by carbon sequestration – or flat
out counteracting that effect – such as
by decreasing the amount of light that can
reach the ground and get absorbed and re-emitted
as infrared.
There’s arguably a fourth approach too,
but it’s not really a solution so much as
coming to terms with it.
Now of course one could adapt to a changed
world as is normally the case throughout our
world’s long history – though of course
many things failed to adapt and went extinct.
However you can also treat the effects too.
If you’re getting more rain and rising water
levels, you can take advantage of that where
it helps you – plants do love warmth, rain,
and carbon dioxide after all – and you can
work to mitigate effects where they hurt you.
You can build sea walls to prevent coastal
flooding and erosion from waves while actively
managing your waterways to keep that rain
from draining all the soil and nutrients into
the sea.
You can create zoos and preserves and DNA
storage vaults to prevent extinction or later
reverse it, see the De-extinction episode,
but these aren’t really solutions so much
as adaptation.
Now as to solutions, you’ve always got the
question of not just if it can be done, but
does it cause additional problems, possibly
worse ones.
You also have to ask about cost, can it be
done by something else cheaper?
Also, if possible, can we actually make a
profit off it?
Directly or indirectly.
Just as an example, if someone found out a
way tomorrow to get fusion power working cheaply
and easily, so that we could churn out reactors
that made electricity in bulk significantly
cheaper than hydrocarbon fossil fuels plants,
we could entirely eliminate the carbon footprint
of power generation.
Cheaper power is obviously a global economic
boon, but we could also then turn a profit
sucking carbon dioxide out of the air, because
gasoline is an amazing portable power source
and while it takes more energy to force carbon
dioxide and water back together to make a
hydrocarbon than you get burning it, what
we really care about for mobile power generation
is easy and portable energy, and chemical
fuels way outperform batteries in energy density
and cost.
You can then remove CO2 from the air and store
it as liquid money.
This basic technology was demonstrated by
the Naval Research Laboratory for making jet
fuel a number of years ago, and can work with
fission power plants, but the program was
canceled after long-duration testing due to
lack of funding.
It could be revived and possibly be an economical
approach, and this would presumably work all
the better with fusion power.
Of course we don’t have fusion yet, except
for fusion bombs, and though we’ve discussed
using fusion bombs for economical power generation
in mega-reactors, this is just one of a handful
of ways you could use nukes to save our planet.
Another would be using it to blow up asteroids.
Now asteroids have often caused climatic and
ecological problems when they’ve hit our
planet, and would be one case where you need
to engage in climate change mitigation that
has nothing to do with carbon dioxide.
Indeed you might want to pump up your greenhouse
gas production if one hit us to counterbalance
any cooling effects from the debris.
Key thought there: cooling effects from the
debris.
We often discuss asteroid mining on this channel
and I’ve noted that you want to do all your
mining and refining out at that asteroid and
just bring the bits you want home, not drag
the whole thing here at great cost of energy
and risk accidentally dropping the thing on
Earth, however miniscule that risk is.
Of course it’s a lot different if you do
it on purpose.
There’s quite a few Near Earth asteroids
we could bump with some carefully coordinated
nuking into a collision path with Earth, then
blow up just before it hit to scatter its
bits and pieces so they burned up in the atmosphere
and the debris rained down and helped cool
the planet a little, just enough to reflect
away maybe 1% of our sunlight.
You could potentially keep a long cycle of
smaller asteroids coming from the Belt too.
Head out, strip the things down to manageable
chunks depleted of all their precious and
valuable metals like gold and platinum, then
slug the thing towards Earth.
Not the best space-based approach, as we’ll
see, but it certainly gets the job done.
Of course if you just want debris in the atmosphere,
we can make it a lot closer to home.
And no not by scraping regolith off the moon
and chucking it down at Earth via Mass Drivers,
though if you need a quick and dirty solution
you could nuke the heck out of the Moon for
a while and rely on all the debris kicked
up by that in Cislunar space to hang around
the area blocking light and it would have
a very long dwell time before settling back
down, but this of course would be quite problematic
for future spacecraft.
Another option is to get that debris from
Earth, just nuke volcanoes and force them
to erupt, and volcanoes of course are another
of our frequent causes of climatic issues.
It’s all well and good to discuss dealing
with carbon dioxide, but if we have a major
volcanic eruption tomorrow, we need to be
able to deal with that too.
Now there’s no opposite of a greenhouse
gas.
A greenhouse gas is any gas that absorbs radiation
in the wavelengths or frequencies the Earth
emits it, which incidentally is a much lower
frequency of infrared than what comes off
very hot objects like the sun, most of the
photons coming off the Sun are in the infrared
range, not visible or ultraviolet frequencies,
but infrared is a very large range of the
spectrum compared to visible light.
Quite a lot of gases do absorb infrared, generally
the ones that don’t are those composed of
two of the same atom like diatomic oxygen
or nitrogen, or monatomic noble gases like
helium or argon.
As gases go, carbon dioxide isn’t all that
good of a greenhouse gas, but there are lots
of things that produce it and it has a very
long dwell time, as opposed to Ozone, triatomic
oxygen, or nitrous oxide, which don’t last
too long; or water, which handily falls out
of the sky after a bit.
Needless to say, there are gases that don’t
absorb infrared in any significant way, but
there isn’t any gas that anti-absorbs it,
so no anti-greenhouse gas.
What we do have are things which either directly
reflect light away when it comes in from the
Sun, or which cause the formation of things
which do, like clouds.
Not all clouds do this job as well, after
all clouds are made of water and water is
a greenhouse gas, so it’s got to be clouds
that reflect more visible light than they’re
absorbing in infrared.
We can calibrate what aerosols we use for
encouraging cloud formation and where to try
to get the best cloud types.
Our preferred candidate for this is sulfides,
but launching them up there from aircraft
or artillery is arguably counter-productive,
since those tend to produce greenhouse gases
to operate.
Alternatively we might just add some sulfides
to aircraft on their regular flights, though
since that takes extra fuel, isn’t actually
free.
Lofting the stuff up there is going to cost
energy and our energy production via hydrocarbons
is the issue of concern in the first place.
This is exactly what something like a nuclear-powered
rail gun or mass driver spacecraft launcher
might be ideal for.
When not chucking spaceships into orbit, it
could be firing up larger pods of sulfides
into the upper atmosphere to seed those reflective
clouds.
It’s estimated it would take about 5 million
tons of sulfur dioxide sent into the atmosphere
every year to offset the CO2, less than a
billion dollars a year of material, and your
launch cost isn’t much higher though would
vary depending on the launch mechanism.
Now this all sounds good, and it should work,
but sulfur isn’t the healthiest thing in
the world and while the amounts are minimal,
there’s concerns it would have some negative
effects on folks with breathing problems like
asthma, and might damage the stratospheric
ozone layer.
One also hates to say it, since it will tend
to be true of most methods, but it’s also
likely to have lots of effects on the climate
and ecology we didn’t anticipate anymore
than we anticipated a lot of the issues of
other byproducts of industrial production.
This is part of why I generally dislike the
notion of using aerosols for climate control.
It isn’t that it doesn’t work, but that
it’s essentially trying to fix the problem
with another problem.
Climate change factors are not limited to
just things which alter how well we absorb
and reflect Sunlgiht, or emit the infrared
waste heat of that light afterward, but it
is the big one.
And carbon dioxide, asteroid impacts, or volcanoes
are all essentially disrupting that reflection,
absorption, and emission balance by altering
the chemical properties of the atmosphere.
Altering it more but in a different way always
strikes me as a bit non-ideal.
If you’ve got a pot of water you can add
some salt so that it will boil at a higher
temperature, you could lower that back down
by decreasing the pressure in the room you’re
in, or changing the pot to lose heat to the
outside air faster so less gets in the water,
but it seems easier to just turn the heat
down.
Of course the heater in this case is the Sun,
which is hard to adjust the thermostat on…
and while there are methods for doing so,
see our episode on Starlifting, such efforts
would be outside today’s parameter of near-term
solutions.
What we can do instead though is effectively
slide something between the Sun-Flame and
Earth-kettle to turn that thermostat down.
That’s essentially the notion with clouds,
and we already suggested doing that in space
by creating debris.
However, I’m a big believer in getting two
birds with one stone, or preferably a whole
flock with a shotgun, so we’ll move on to
consider a method for cutting greenhouse gas
emissions while lowering Earth’s temperature
in a way we can control, and even reverse
if we need to warm the planet for some reason,
and do it all at a profit.
We can employ measures to prevent the current
issue worsening but what we ideally want is
something that leaves us in far better control
against any such disaster scenario in the
future too.
We’ll discuss that method momentarily but
first a quick aside.
I’ve mentioned using nuclear energy in the
form of bombs or running mass drivers, but
ultimately our biggest problem is getting
all the energy we need while causing the minimum
ecological and economic disruption or damage.
Nuclear power, even regular old fission, really
does work well for that though is hardly without
its issues either.
There is a habit of folks polarizing on the
issue, either it’s a horrible idea or one
with nothing but benefits, and of course the
truth lies somewhere in the middle, but in
my opinion it tilts toward the latter.
For power generation, if your option is fossil
fuels or uranium, go with uranium.
Similarly, if we can get better at making
cheap and durable solar panels, that can replace
or heavily supplement current power generation,
and an improvement in battery technology would
make that even better and let us do mobile
energy like electric vehicles better too.
You could also potentially make your solar
panels highly reflective to any frequency
they couldn’t turn into electricity and
that might help quite a lot as well, as would
minimal things like painting things more reflective
colors.
As we mentioned with grass near the beginning,
even small changes to the planet’s net reflection,
its albedo, could help quite a lot.
Of course the easiest way to raise that albedo
without messing with our atmospheric composition
or surface is to place mirrors far above the
Earth, and if you’ve seen Sky Cities or
Sky Platforms you know there are ways we could
do this with floating structures that would
be far above what we think of as our atmosphere
and where all the real weather happens.
We’ll discuss orbital versions in a moment,
but there’s a lot to be said about just
making big reflective balloons and floating
them up very high.
Now you mostly put them up high to minimize
weather issues, but the higher the better
since at least some light is getting absorbed
and turned into heat for every meter of air
that light passes through, and reabsorbed
after being emitted as heat for every meter
of air the waste infrared photons travel through
before leaving the planet.
This is part of why we don’t want ground-based
mirrors, which would be easier to do, as they’d
be a bit less effective.
Mostly of course we just don’t want to lose
that land.
Although wear and tear is an issue too.
If you just stuck a reflective foil over deserts
or tracts of deep ocean, all that sand and
water is going to be a pain to keep clear
and damage your mirrors.
This is less of an issue high up, especially
above the clouds where the air has thinned
out to a tiny fraction of the sea-level density.
These would generally need constant replacement
though if they relied on simple lifting gas
buoyancy, as they’d leak and probably get
chewed up by solar and atmospheric wear and
tear.
It might be better to go for something like
a big sheet that wasn’t quite lighter than
air, so it could be sturdier, and that wasn’t
just mirrors but had some solar collectors
on it too to power thrusters to provide some
speed and lift.
That also keeps them in motion so they’re
spreading their shade around.
I mentioned near the beginning that we could
produce huge quantities of aluminum foil,
enough to wrap the Earth many times over,
with a fraction of the energy hitting Earth.
And of course if we were getting a lot of
our power from carbon-neutral sources that
would mitigate the problem and even allow
you to spend some of that power on carbon
sequestration technologies.
It takes energy to sequester carbon, and indeed
as nice as trees are for doing it, they take
energy too, we just don’t have to plug them
into a wall socket as they use sunlight and
their leaves for it.
I should note that plants aren’t even vaguely
efficient at carbon sequestration compared
to existing technologies.
You can sequester a lot more carbon with the
same footprint of solar panels as a tree has
leaves with just about any of our sequestration
technologies, and over a much shorter period
of time.
The issue is just economics.
Though building and maintaining has a carbon
footprint, all machines do since they are
made by people who have carbon footprints,
whereas a seed tossed in the dirt mostly grows
and maintains itself.
Just remember though, biology is generally
not efficient, even if often more appealing
as natural.
Let’s combine all these notions though.
We have a device called a Power Satellite,
and we walk through the mechanics and economics
of them in the episode of that name, but fundamentally
they are giant big thin mirrors that bounce
their light onto a solar thermal device that
turns it into energy and then into microwaves
then beams those microwaves down to us, to
be re-converted into electricity.
They are thin and thus quite light, but most
of their mass is abundant material and easy
to make; it’s just a reflective thin foil
made from some metal like aluminum or steel,
either of which is very easy to source off
the Moon – See our episode Moon: Industrial
Complex for discussion of that.
Now, mining and manufacturing in space tends
to seem high-tech, and we’d assume it was
grossly expensive to launch all components
from Earth, but a simple remote controlled
scooper robot and solar kiln on the Moon is
well within modern technology.
You would need a serious base on the Moon
but to be honest I think most of us would
regard that as an added bonus.
However, let’s consider cost.
We need to be able to reflect or shade maybe
1% of Earth overall to mitigate current thermal
concerns, which would be about 5 trillion
square meters of shade or mirror, or power
satellite dishes.
We’d probably pessimistically need to replace
them every decade.
So we’d need to launch 500 billion square
meters of foil into space a year.
Launch costs are about $1000 a kilogram now
and would drop more if we were doing major
work up there, but if we were assuming the
very thin foils intended for solar sails we
mentioned near the beginning, that would be
20 nanometer thick sheets.
You can stack 50 million of those a meter
high, so 500 billion square meters of them
would be a stack 100 meters by 100 meters
by 1 meter, 10,000 cubic meters, so 27 million
kilograms, or 2.7 billion dollars in launch
costs at that $1000 a kilogram figure.
Mind you, this is just for launching the material
alone, however.
Now I suspect you’d go thicker, making and
deploying sheets that thin is no easy task
but you’d find the balance point where the
other manufacturing and deployment hassles
and costs equaled out to the added launch
costs of a thicker foil.
It’s easier to make thicker foils too, so
if you were cutting launch costs by working
from the moon with mostly automated equipment,
you might go pretty thick.
Solar Shades and mirrors are easy to make
and cheap, but to be useful and durable you
need to include some power and guidance on
them, they can do station-keeping by bouncing
sunlight around since they’re essentially
a big solar sail but that requires some computerization
and machinery on board, not just a paper-thin
sheet of shade or mirror.
If you’re doing all that, why not bounce
that light onto a solar thermal power generator
and ship it down to Earth as carbon-neutral
Electricity?
A source that can be used for carbon-capture
too, as even with cooling we may want to reduce
carbon levels which have some other climatic
and ecological effects we may need to mitigate.
How about a solar source not dependent on
weather or time of day.
Why not use it to power anti-asteroid lasers
to protect us from an asteroid impact and
climate change from that?
Why not include the ability to swivel so they
can just bounce more light down to Earth in
case we need to brighten or warm things up
after a volcanic eruption?
Indeed as your computerization improves, you
might be able to use them in tandem with superior
weather modeling to control the weather and
mitigate hurricanes and more extreme storms.
You could even do rotating ones on more polar
orbits to shade the arctic region disproportionately
and help ice formation -which also reflects
sunlight along with storing water- to mitigate
ocean rising.
And the best thing is that you could do it
all at a profit!
As we mentioned in power satellites, for space
based industry to really take off it helps
to have a major sector of the global economy
that can be done in space, and the energy
sector is trillions of dollars a year.
Could we do it today?
Well, actually yes but probably not at a profit
just yet.
I suspect economy of scale and experience
doing it and improving designs would actually
permit that even with modern tech, but to
really make it profitable – which is obviously
preferable – you really need to improve
automation so we could get around launch costs
by doing it from the Moon, including building
most of the non-simple shade or mirror components,
or get launch costs a good deal lower.
We’ve discussed a lot of options for that
in our Upward Bound series, many of which
we could build today but only economically
if we were seriously scaling up how much stuff
we threw into space.
But of course, if you’re shipping a million
tons of shade, mirror, and power production
into space every year, that’s pretty scaled
up.
So while there are a lot of near-term solutions
for climate change we might use, if I had
my own pick, I’d go all-in for power satellites.
All that cheap energy, and carbon neutral
at that, would represent a massive economic
boon across all sectors of our global economy,
let us run carbon-capture, give us quite a
nice infrastructure in space for our other
space-based goals and aspirations, and let
us begin contemplating serious weather control
operations.
And we wouldn’t have to devote any extra
land to energy production or carbon-sequestration
efforts too, or tinker with our atmosphere’s
chemical composition.
It’s not something we could literally do
tomorrow, but it’s hardly far future stuff
either, and it’s a solution that not only
doesn’t force us to curtail our dreams by
limiting our economy and production, but actually
could be a huge benefit to enhancing those
and making our dreams of space come true.
Why get two birds with one stone when you
can use a shotgun and get a whole flock?
We were talking about Climate Change Mitigation
today and one part we mostly skipped was the
whole notion of waste, recycling, and garbage.
About the same time I was writing this we
did a episode topic poll where the Future
of Garbage came up as a topic and I decided
we go ahead and do it as a companion video
for today’s episode, and you can catch that
as an Early Release over on Nebula, along
with our other early releases like “Can
we have a Trillion People on Earth?” or
our Nebula exclusives like our Coexistence
with Aliens series.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself
and many other creators like CGP Grey, Minute
Physics, and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
I mentioned today that when climate changes
happen our ecology slowly adapts to it and
that one option is that we would adapt, but
that takes a long time to occur naturally.
However, there may be artificial routes that
can be done even in existing organisms, not
just subsequent generations, and we’ll explore
those more next week in “DNA Manipulation
of Living Beings”
The week after that, we’ll return to the
Fermi Paradox series for a look at the Zoo
Hypothesis, the notion that we don’t see
aliens because they are keeping us unable
to, essentially living in their zoo.
Before those episodes though, we also have
our monthly livestream Q&A coming up this
Sunday, February 23rd, at 4pm Eastern time,
and I hope to see you there.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, visit our website IsaacArthur.net
to donate to the show or look over our inventory
of over 200 episodes or our awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
