The Moon is a harsh mistress, with an airless
surface wracked by two-week periods of scorching
sunlight followed by the long night, but below
its surface lies caverns and tunnels we might
shelter in that are greater in scope than
anything on Earth.
Today we’ll be examining the pros and cons
of settling lava tubes on the Moon, and other
places, along with asking what life inside
one would be like for those early settlers.
Lava tubes are natural underground tunnels
formed by flowing lava under the surface of
a planet or moon, or a larger asteroid for
that matter.
They are created when the surface of a lava
flow cools and solidifies, while the lava
beneath continues to flow.
When the lava flow stops and drains away,
it leaves behind a hollow tube.
As best as we can tell, most lunar volcanic
activity was between 3-4 billion years ago
but some activity was as recent as a billion
years back.
Normally, where Earth is considered normal
anyway, such tubes would be long gone but
there’s no continuing geological activity
to shake them,nor wind or rain or flood to
collapse them or fill them with sediment.
Nor organic proceses inside to break them,
as moss or tree roots can do to stone on Earth,
and indeed on some planets lava tubes might
be the only place life could reside or begin,
but that life might damage those tunnels and
self-destruct their ecosystem in the process.
This lack of destructive forces also means
they can get very large, even compared to
the ones we get on earth where they can be
wide enough to drive a truck down and miles
long.
We think some on the Moon might be as much
as 500 meters or 1600 feet wide, and tens
of miles long.
We can spot these by various entries where
it’s collapsed, called skylights, and the
basic notion is that you find such a tunnel,
dome over those skylights, and fill the lava
tube with air.
This can be a short term base inside a small
lava tube that really is just pressurized
with oxygen, probably produced by taking oxides
minerals and turning them into metals for
use and with oxygen as a waste byproduct.
Or we could be looking at huge affairs with
liners put into to help seal air and moisture
in and entire ecologies that we might transport
to the Moon.
We’ll discuss such options in a bit, but
let’s cover the basic advantages first.
Lava tubes are of significant interest for
lunar exploration and potential settlement
for several reasons:
Protection from Radiation and Micrometeorites:
The Moon's surface is bombarded with cosmic
radiation and micrometeorites due to the lack
of a protective atmosphere like Earth's.
Lava tubes, being underground, provide natural
shielding against these hazards.
In this regard it is much easier to create
pressurized environments as well, since you
do not need to import or manufacture your
wall and ceiling, and thick and redundant
enough to survive radiation and micrometeors.
Radiation will generally be very rough on
most materials we would use for a dome and
thus limit service lifetime.
Temperature Stability: The Moon experiences
extreme temperature variations, ranging from
very hot during the lunar day to extremely
cold during the lunar night.
Needless to say, temperatures ranging from
colder than the Antarctic to hotter than the
Sahara are not optimal for human habitation.
Lava tubes maintain a more constant temperature
inside, which would be beneficial for human
habitats and sensitive equipment, and which
seriously cuts down on how much power you
need for heating and cooling.
Structural Integrity: Lava tubes are believed
to be structurally sound, providing a natural
"roof" and walls that could support lunar
bases.
I think you would want to shore them up if
you planned to spend a lot of time in them,
but the far lower gravity on the Moon makes
that easier too.
So, this would reduce the need for heavy construction
materials to be transported from Earth or
that need to be fabricated on the Moon, since
at the very least you need less structural
materials and don’t need them on Day 1.
Potential for Water Ice: Some lunar lava tubes,
especially those in permanently shadowed regions
near the poles, may contain water ice deposits.
As we’ve discussed in other episodes on
lunar ISRU, or in situ resource utilization,
if we have ice we not only have drinking water
but a lower energy way to produce oxygen,
and even fuel production if it is in sufficient
quantity.
And unlike other scarce resources, we’re
not really worried about depleting the Moon
of ice if it helps us develop in space, since
once you get out past the Asteroid Belt there’s
an ocean of the stuff available for importation.
Indeed, as we’ll discuss next month in Colonizing
Ganymede, there’s more water on some of
those outer system moons than in all of Earth’s
oceans.
Ice inside a lava tube is also easier to extract
and store without needing huge and sturdy
surface tanks.
In zero or low pressure environments, there’s
only a very narrow window of temperature a
substance can be a liquid, it is essentially
a state at which matter can no longer hold
together on its own because it is vibrating
too fast but doesn’t fall apart as a gas
because some other gaseous materials around
it are helping shove it together, remove those
and it turns into a gas.
And in an airless environment like the Moon
liquid water effectively cannot exist, just
ice and steam.
Next is Scientific Exploration: Lava tubes
might contain geological and mineralogical
treasures that could offer insights into the
Moon's history and evolution.
They also make great base camps for extended
exploration activities as you can plausibly
hole up inside one, maybe find ice for drinking
and air, and with the lower temperature variation
potentially survive a lunar night without
freezing or escape the intense sunlight of
the lunar day.
Speaking of that…
Natural Habitats: Lava tubes could provide
ready-made habitats, requiring only minimal
alterations to make them habitable, which
is more efficient than building structures
from scratch.
Much like caves in a mountain, lava tubes
on the Moon become safe places for those roaming
the Moon and logical first bases in a given
area.
Given that gravity is very low there, you
can still construct a surface base nearby,
including a dome over the skylight and solar
panels, while having easy access to the large
underground lava tubes.
Even stair cases hundreds of feet high on
the Moon would be easy climbs, so long as
you’re not doing them in a full spacesuit.
In summary, lava tubes on the Moon could provide
natural, safe, and stable environments for
future human explorers and settlers, reducing
the need for extensive and heavy construction
materials and offering protection from the
harsh lunar environment.
Now back in our episode the Domes of Mars
we went over the pros and cons of domes versus
underground facilities, and as we noted there
it isn’t an either-or situation, you will
have both, but the ratio will be very dependent
on practical considerations, many of which
we really don’t know yet.
Many of those disadvantages to underground
living or advantages to surface life are essentially
the same on the Moons as Mars but there are
some vital differences, and one of those is
that the day on Mars is basically the same
as Earth’s, just a hair longer.
Not so on the Moon, where the day is a month
long.
Two weeks of sunshine followed by two of darkness.
Which means living in a dome on the surface
of the Moon is not a close approximation of
Earth conditions except for a little lower
gravity, like on Mars.
We detailed those disadvantages more in that
episode but here’s a summary of them and
in regard to lava tubes on the Moon specifically,
and there are also notable disadvantages and
challenges:
First is Accessibility: Lava tubes may be
located in regions that are difficult to access
with current technology.
We are not going to just land a spaceship
in one, indeed that would be a rather bad
idea for a number of reasons, nor are you
landing right next to it unless dropping a
spaceship on or next to it gives you immediate
data on how stable that lava tube happens
to be.
So, to get to one includes challenges in both
landing as near these structures as circumstance
allows and entering them safely.
This is why we usually see them as a phase
2 operation on the Moon, not the place you
land your first astronauts at to set up an
Alpha Base.
Which brings up Structural Stability: While
lava tubes are generally stable, their structural
integrity could vary.
Some may have weak spots or be prone to collapse,
especially under the stress of human activity
or lunar quakes.
Again, trying to access them or land near
them might be all it takes to set one off.
Limited Natural Light: Inside a lava tube,
there is no natural light, not even the two
weeks on and two weeks off the surface gets.
Which would necessitate artificial lighting
systems for both practical and psychological
well-being of inhabitants.
It’s a bit debatable if they’d be a better
place to grow food at then a surface dome
since either one needs supplemental lighting,
though considerably more in a lava tube, and
a plant can undergo low lighting, such as
a protracted cloudy week, and rapidly bounce
into growth when the lunar day begins again.
So, a dome probably wouldn’t need more than
a fraction the artificial lighting a lava
tube needs.
Isolation and Confinement: Living in a lava
tube would mean being in a confined, enclosed
space for extended periods, which could have
psychological effects on the inhabitants.
This isolation could also make emergency evacuation
or resupply more challenging.
Though I think the time in a cave is probably
no more psychologically worrisome than time
in a thin glass dome surrounded by a total
lack of atmosphere.
Communication Challenges: Communicating with
the surface or Earth might be more difficult
from within a lava tube, requiring relay systems
or other technological solutions.
On the Earth-side of the Moon, Earth is there
day and night, always more or less in the
same place in the sky varying depending on
where on the Moon you’re at.
Getting a signal there is pretty easy, whereas
a lava tube might require many hundreds of
feet of wire if not entire miles.
There’s also Environmental Unknowns: We
just don't know what they are like inside
beyond educated guessing, as we have never
probed one.
The environment inside a lava tube could present
unknown hazards, much as the sharp regolith
on the Moon surprised us during the Apollo
era.
There’s also the question of not what they
might have but what they might turn out not
to have, like sturdy sides and ceilings.
And off our own moon, they are the sorts of
places where we might find existing life on
a planet or moon whose surface seemed otherwise
barren.
Resource Availability: While some lava tubes
might be located near potential resources
like water ice, or a good place to build a
landing field, others may not be.
This could necessitate long-distance travel
on the lunar surface to transport resources,
adding complexity and risk.
I sat through a talk by my friend Pascal Lee
last year where he was examining good landing
sites based on where we might get water ice,
and the Moon is a place of sharp and steep
features, so very often a rover wanting to
navigate between two places might have to
go miles out of the way just to get to spot
very nearby.
It is easy to forget that the Moon is huge,
and traveling around on it is much harder
than on Earth.
I think we tend to assume after traveling
huge distances to get there or to some planet
like Mars that we can ignore those distances
on the ground but they are very difficult
places to traverse even if you had a large
supply of equipment and fuel to do it with,
whereas we are likely to be very limited in
that regard early on.
Here on Earth where moving is easier, we would
never say a supply of ice ten miles from where
I wanted to build my home was ‘easy access
to water’.
Which takes us to Technological and Logistical
Challenges: Setting up a base inside a lava
tube would require advanced technology and
significant logistical planning.
This includes the transport of materials,
life support systems, and the development
of infrastructure for energy, waste management,
and habitat maintenance.
In theory an inflatable dome can simply be
kicked out the side of your lander and inflated
from tanks.
There’s also Limited Expansion Potential:
While huge in terms of any near or mid-term
need, the size and shape of a lava tube might
limit the potential for expanding a lunar
base.
Like caves on Earth, they are not big enough
for truly impressive civilizations.
This could be a significant constraint as
the needs and numbers of inhabitants grow.
Though they could potentially dig more tunnels
or simply spill onto the surface, digging
in low gravity can be easier.
Lack of Emergency Exits: In case of an emergency,
options for quick evacuation could be limited,
especially if entrances and exits are few
and far between.
I think this is outweighed by the protective
advantage they have, but it is very true that
unless you’re right by a skylight, in event
of collapse you’ve only got two directions
to travel, at least one now blocked off.
So, while lunar lava tubes provide some natural
advantages for establishing a lunar base,
they also present a unique set of challenges
that require careful consideration and advanced
technological solutions.
All that said, they remain very attractive
as spots to set up shop in and many will be
big enough for big communities, though the
question would remain why you wanted to build
one there.
Why live in a lava tube and why build a base
or settlement there?
And I don’t just mean why you would live
in a lava tube as opposed to some random crater.
To settle the solar system you need a reason
you might want to live somewhere as opposed
to moving off Earth, and to some godforsaken
rock as opposed to a nicely tailored O’Neill
Cylinder orbiting it.
Economically it probably means you’re in
the mining or refining trades, or build or
maintain large power collectors.
At least as the main lifeblood of the local
economy, you could be anywhere in the galaxy
doing just about anything, maybe even including
a pirate base, and probably still find lots
of shops, retail stores, restaurants, teachers,
road crews, and excluding the pirate case,
police.
So, let’s take a visit to New Souterraine,
a lunar lava tube settlement founded principally
from eastern Canada and New England, and it
runs in a lava tube 30 miles long that winds
its way around the Eastern Edge of the Moon
where Earth is always visible but on the horizon.
New Souterraine has something fairly rare
in Lunar Lava Tubes, and that was deposits
of gold, found in the year 2149, and before
the year was out claims were in place and
several hundred tons of equipment dropped
there in order to facilitate establishment.
By the late 22nd century it also had the largest
tourist income of any principally underground
settlement on the Moon.
The Gardens of New Souterraine are often loftily
compared to the Hanging Gardens of Babylon,
though mostly by their tourist bureau.
At a population of 20,000.
New Souterrains is a long skinny settlement
30 miles long and varying between half and
quarter of a mile wide, with an estimated
10 square miles of subsurface living area,
or 6400 acres.
In addition to its handful of skylights, which
are now domed over, several artificial skylights
have been added.
These use a shifting filter to brighten and
darken the dome, and alter how much red or
blue light is coming through to simulate time
of day better.
The sunset on the Moon, incidentally, is not
red, as there’s no air producing that prism
effect.
Running down one side of the colony, and about
a mile to the side, is a long field of solar
collectors that help run their refineries
during day time, with excess energy pumped
into molten salt thermal wadis for night time
usage.
In tandem with a nuclear reactor, this helps
power the night phase, where daylight is simulated
at closer to that experienced on a cloudy
day.
New Souterraine holds the interesting title
of highest number of tanning beds and sunrooms
per capita in the Guinness Book of Solar Records.
Shade plants tend to be most popular for personal
gardens on the Moon, since they need less
artificial lighting to keep them thriving
in dark weeks, but mushroom gardens are also
very popular, and often fed on nutrient mass
from crops that can bloom well under just
2 weeks of bright sun, such as algae.
Domed Algae farms on the moon are rather common
since they are a good way of creating topsoil
from the existing regolith and ice, and various
strains can be used to create feedstock for
plastic or fuels, and edible sources of protein
too, for both humans and what limited livestock
are adapting to the Moon thus far.
You can cycle up algae in domes when the sun
rises and have a full supply for processing
2 weeks later, and use the same personnel
for both operations, as well as getting the
domed vats ready for their next round.
The folk of New Souterraine do the same for
mineral extraction too, typically mining during
the dark weeks then doing their energy intensive
smelting and refining during sunnier days
when the solar farms are producing.
There’s talk of more microwave power satellites
being placed in orbit to beam energy down
to those in the dark weeks, and the settlement’s
mayor, Camille Cormier, did campaign this
last election on helping raise capital for
that project.
The Cormier family is a trusted name in lunar
circles, especially the lava tube communities,
as the Cormier family is among the original
hundred to first to call the Moon their home,
back then they were nestled in a smaller lava
tube beneath the Moon’s powdery surface
and were instrumental in prototyping both
the algae-mushroom farm cycle and lava tube
mineral extraction.
They were pioneers, part of a grand experiment
to test the feasibility of extraterrestrial
living.
Their new home was a cylindrical habitat sealed
within the ancient, hollowed rock.
The tube's entrance was a marvel of engineering,
a dome of transparent aluminum allowing a
panoramic view of the stark lunar landscape.
Inside, Luna Haven was a stark contrast to
the barren outside.
The interior was spacious, designed to mimic
a comfortable, Earth-like environment.
It even had a small garden, where genetically
modified plants thrived under artificial sunlight.
Serena and Baptiste Cormier, along with their
two children, Camille and Leonardo, adapted
quickly to their new life.
Their days were structured yet varied, filled
with maintenance tasks, scientific research,
and homeschooling, since even remote teachers
from earth had an uncomfortable signal lag
time.
The family had to be self-sufficient, relying
on their habitat's closed-loop life support
systems for air, water, and food.
One of the most significant challenges was
the lack of natural sunlight and Earth's gravity.
The Cormiers combated this with daily exercise
routines and a special lighting system that
simulated the natural progression of day and
night.
This helped them maintain their circadian
rhythms and kept the plants in their garden
growing, but they knew that was an uphill
fight and they needed to create ecologies
and agriculture more suited to their new home
on Luna.
They had access to a vast collection of entertainment
and data though, albeit not without limitations
from light lag and bandwidth constraints.
Despite these comforts, life on the Moon was
not without its trials.
The isolation was palpable.
Communications with Earth were limited to
video calls and messages with a delay, making
them feel even more distant from their friends
and relatives.
However, they found solace in each other's
company and the unique experience they shared
within their family and a handful of those
other early settlers living similar lives,
and within instant communication range.
For Camille and Leonardo, they learned about
lunar geology right from their home, exploring
different parts of the lava tube with their
parents.
These expeditions were the highlight of their
week, donning their small space suits and
venturing into unexplored sections.
The most significant event for the Cormier
family was when they discovered ice deposits
in a remote section of the tube.
This discovery was monumental, as it promised
a more sustainable water source for future
lunar settlers.
Over time, the Cormier family became a team,
each member playing a vital role in the survival
and success of their mission.
They were among the first to celebrate the
new lunar holidays, created new traditions,
and even shared their experiences to those
back on Earth by video, which indeed was one
of their major sources of funding and endowment.
Unfortunately, Leonardo’s plans to be the
first Professor of Lunar Geology, or Selenology
on Earth who was trained for it on the Moon
fell through when the terrestrial gravity
proved too much for him, being used to only
a sixth of what it is on Earth.
He returned to the Moon in 2148 rather depressed
but determined to continue his work, and was
grateful when Camille encouraged him to go
on one more exploratory mission together,
where they traveled further than ever before
to check out a lava tube that had only ever
had the most cursory robotic surveying.
This turned out to be where they found a gold
strike and helped Camille become a major figure
in the rise of a reasonably self-sufficient
lunar economy that brought her back to New
Souterraine some years later to start her
own family.
For Leonardo the journey was only beginning
as he won a spot on the upcoming colony mission
to Ganymede, Jupiter’s largest Moon, but
that's a tale for another day.
So how likely is this all to happen?
Well, the good news is that robotic exploration
of the Moon is getting easier every day, even
with setbacks like landers tipping over on
their sides, and that helps us with lava tubes
as NASA has often had an understandable reluctance
to attempt to send a manned mission to one.
Given all the risk and difficulties of even
just a regular mission to Luna, adding in
a spelunking journey exacerbates that quite
a lot.
But dropping a robot probe down into one is
a lot more viable.
The exploratory module for that might need
to be nuclear powered, or perhaps a ground
base with solar power and a transmitter could
maintain a hardline physical connection to
the probe, given that the low gravity makes
it quite viable to use your power cord as
your rope down one of those skylights too.
Indeed Asugumo, a spider probe that was to
be Britain’s first ever moon rover, was
designed with lava tubes in mind and unfortunately
it was delayed due to Covid.
If you’re curious, the name I’m probably
mispronouncing derives from a Japanese spider
that brings good luck, which might be appropriate
given that delay is why it wasn’t on Peregrine,
which ended up burning up in Earth’s atmosphere
just a few days before I wrote this script’s
first draft.
Fun sidenote, I was in Pittsburgh to give
a talk at the Carnegie Science Center the
same week Peregrine was shipping out from
Astrobotic’s lab there and my wife Sarah
and I were the last two guests to get to see
it.
Space is neither kind nor forgiving, so we
must always be relentless in its pursuit,
and here’s hoping their next launch later
this year has better luck.
I am quite confident we’ll see robots exploring
those lava tubes inside a decade or two, though
full exploration may truly require a human
presence, and for all the endless delays,
I think that human presence returning - and
staying – on the Moon is fast approaching,
and with it, in time perhaps, people living
in those lava tubes.
They’re safe places we could build settlements
from which might hatch our wider dreams of
space, but are they places people would want
to live and raise a family?
Let me know what you think in the comments
on today’s episode.
We were talking about the difficulties of
trying to raise a family on some outpost far
from earth today, education is a pretty big
part of that.
As we head towards summer break for the school
year, one of those challenges, whether as
a student or a parent, is trying to make sure
you don’t lose any knowledge during the
long break.
The best way to learn is daily and establishing
a daily learning habit is one of the most
important things you can do, both for personal
and professional growth.
That’s where our friends at Brilliant can
help.
Brilliant helps you build real knowledge in
minutes a day—with fun lessons you can do
whenever you have time.
Brilliant focuses on fun and interactive learning,
where you learn by doing, with thousands of
interactive lessons in science, math, data
analysis, programming, and AI.
From simple to complex, whatever your skill
level, Brilliant customizes content to fit
your needs and lets you start where you should
and improve at your own pace.
I’ve been using and recommending Brilliant
for years, they’re our show’s longest
running sponsor, and I’ve yet to hear a
single complaint, but I’ve heard plenty
of satisfied customers.
And you can try everything Brilliant has to
offer for free for a full 30 days, visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur
or click on the link in the description.
You’ll also get 20% off an annual premium
subscription.
So next week we’ll finish out the month
of April with a pair of episodes looking at
colonizing white dwarf star systems, bringing
new life to those dead stars, and binary star
systems, and their unique challenges with
habitable zones and stability.
After that we’ll start May up with a look
at the Banks Orbital, also known as God’s
Bracelet, a megastructure space habitat hundreds
of times larger than Earth, that advanced
civilizations might build as an alternative
to terraforming planets.
And speaking of advanced civilizations, the
week after that on Thursday May 9th we’ll
look at the Interdiction Hypothesis of the
Fermi Paradox, which asks if civilizations
out in the galaxy might leave large buffer
zones between their empires, and ask if Earth
might be inside one such empty buffer zone.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you’d like to donate or help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content
like Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
