This episode is sponsored by Audible.
 
It is often wondered if when we should ever 
meet aliens they might look or act like us,  
in whole or part, as an example of convergent 
evolution, but how likely is this?
 
So today we will be looking at the 
notion of convergent evolution,  
the idea that life forms will tend to evolve the 
same traits given long enough. This is probably  
best known from science fiction examples of nearly 
every alien and robot looking roughly humanoid.  
Of course in reality this is because 
we need to put makeup on a human  
or stuff them in a costume for the role 
but the common science fiction reason given  
is that the humanoid form is very efficient 
and likely evolves most frequently.
 
Now convergent evolution is a real thing 
in science, as is divergent evolution,  
where a species branches into vast numbers 
of very different critters. It’s a bit  
different than in scifi though as it is usually 
convergence on a specific useful trait or organ,  
like the eyeball, which is thought to have evolved 
independently on as many as 40 separate occasions.  
Light interacts with so many different organic 
molecules, and knowing when you’re in it,  
out of it, or crossing the boundary can be such 
important survival information, it’s hard for  
any creature to evolve very far on Earth without 
having some sort of light-sensitive body part.  
 
Now if you simply fold that sensitive surface 
over so that all the light striking it comes  
through a small hole, particular light-sensing 
cells will correspond to light coming in from a  
certain angle, and now you’ve formed an 
image of your surroundings on the back  
of a very simple eyeball. The key idea 
here is that it’s such a simple design  
that different creatures can happen--or 
converge--upon it accidentally and independently,  
so creatures can have similar proto-eyeballs 
even though they’re not related. Or are  
related far back when their most recent common 
ancestor had no eyeball or proto-eyeball.
 
We also have mental or emotional convergent 
evolution, which in a human and alien context  
would mean both have developed similar concepts 
for similar instincts of fear, love, hope, trust,  
and so on. And in a similar vein we also have 
cultural or social evolution which is different  
from biological evolution but also probably more 
prone to convergence with high intelligences.  
Concepts like having a legal code and concept 
of justice, or schools, or that even though they  
have half a dozen tentacles for arms and 
legs, and thus can’t handshake on a deal,  
they still have deals and still have gas stations 
or stock markets or electric wall outlets.
 
And this is where we get to the most key concept 
of convergent evolution, that it is essentially  
just a fancy name given to a rather simple idea 
that for any given problem there is a limited set  
of best solutions, unsurprisingly they are often 
arrived at by completely independent efforts.  
This is why we’ll be considering the cultural 
convergence or scientific convergence angles  
today too, even if our focus is mostly biology, 
because it's an extension of the same concept.  
We don’t know how often opposable 
thumbs and high IQs evolve in nature  
but we do know you need the ability to invent 
and precisely manipulate tools to get technology  
so we’d expect alien civilizations 
we encounter to be capable of that. 
 
Thus hands might not be universal but something 
very hand-like is something we would expect to be  
pretty common and the four-fingers-and-a-thumb 
layout with two of them for bilateral symmetry  
wouldn’t be expected to be common but 
wouldn’t be a shock to encounter either.  
Nor would the idea that they would 
build houses with triangular roofs,  
or use a combination of post & lintel and arch 
designs, because those construction concepts are  
fairly universally basic and so their architecture 
might overlap with ours enough that many of their  
designs might be identical to many of our own. 
Now again we’re mostly talking about when we  
converge to a basic concept or trait. So in nature 
for instance, it would not be that weird for trees  
to evolve on many worlds, because there’s two 
critical features to a tree, that it uses sunlight  
for fuel and that it seeks to grow high and wide 
to maximize that. So that basic canopy or mushroom  
or umbrella shape makes sense, at least where 
biological competition for sunlight was in play. 
 
Now on the one hand when a plant randomly exploits 
that shape we expect its descendants to dominate  
the landscape and diverge into separate species, 
so by default we assume two things sharing a  
trait are related after their common ancestor 
developed that trait. However sometimes two  
entirely different critters will move back toward 
each other, converging to that same useful trait.
 
When this happens in nature the results can 
be striking, with species separated by great  
distances and time looking and acting so similar 
the one could be easily mistaken for the other.  
Take for example the ichthyosaur which 
lived between 90 and 250 million years ago.  
A large land-going animal that returned to the 
sea and became adapted to full time life there,  
it’s limbs becoming flippers and even had a 
dorsal fin. Sound familiar? It wasn’t until 40  
million years after the last ichthyosaurs went 
extinct that the first Pakicetus, a wolf-sized  
meat eater dwelling near the coast, followed 
the same path. We know them today as whales.  
If you put their skeletons side-by side you could 
be forgiven for mistaking one for the other.
 
To happen twice, separated by 10s 
of millions of years sounds amazing,  
but it’s not. Mammals alone have separately 
followed this evolutionary path at least seven  
separate times. Each time reaching the same 
approximate shape. Why? Because that shape  
solved the same problem they all had in 
common, how to survive in the ocean.
 
We should first take a step back and talk 
about two important things: firstly what  
evolution is and how it works, and the secondly 
what does it mean for two species to be related.  
This second question is surprisingly 
murky, it’s sort of a trick question by  
the way, more on that in a moment.
Evolution is both complex and simple,  
and ironically over the years I’ve found folks 
botch explaining the concept more often than when  
trying to explain quantum mechanics or special 
relativity so we will take a second to review  
it. I’ve honestly lost track of the number 
of times I’ve heard someone who was firmly  
in the natural evolution camp explain the idea 
with a textbook example of intelligent design.  
Most of the remainder tend to leave out a core bit 
of the concept so that natural selection sounds  
like a tautology, that the fittest survive and 
are considered the fittest because they survive.  
One thing to understand is that while 
evolution is a core concept of biology,  
it’s really more a basic math and statistics 
concept. This is why we can be so confident it  
functions and would on other alien planets, even 
though our fossil record is actually quite tiny,  
was much tinier when the concept gained traction, 
and is non-existent for those other worlds.
 
Evolution requires only two very simple 
conditions. One is that a living thing can  
make copies of itself, but with the possibility of 
very slight and random variations. Secondly that  
selection pressure exists that some copies 
will survive and make copies of their own,  
but others will not. This is not the same as 
simple copy fatigue, where each successive  
copy looks a little different till eventually 
being alien, because the quality of the copy and  
the actual info on that copy control whether 
or not it will get copied again in nature. 
 
The example might be something more like which 
bits of oral history get passed on, their survival  
trait being how easy they are to memorize 
and recite, and how good they are at catching  
someone’s interest to recite or hear and recall 
them. So a story set to a catchy tune or with  
lots of rhyming will probably fare better than a 
story that slowly mutated into many forms … until  
the language changed so that the key words stopped 
rhyming. That’s a decent analogy of how a critter  
can evolve perfectly to an environment then 
suddenly die off from a critical shift to  
that environment or addition of a new organism. 
The data – or DNA – just replicates over and over  
again, it’s entirely stupid and automatic and your 
DNA itself is very removed from the survival game.  
Indeed we want to be careful talking about all 
these processes as the same and over-simplifying.  
At a math and stats level, evolution is easy, 
stuff is constantly dividing and mutating and  
given long enough should reach formats that 
do that most successfully and efficiently. 
 
However we often note that Biology is an emergent 
property of chemistry, itself an emergent property  
of physics. Which is to say that while chemistry 
is entirely based on the laws of physics,  
and biology entirely based on the laws of both, 
and sociology and psychology on all three,  
and various games we play based on all four, the 
actual game rules that emerged at each level are  
so different from the underlying one in concepts 
that you can basically compartmentalize them  
as separate and can learn any given layer 
without having a clue how the layers above  
or below function, or how any of their cousins 
do, like geology or meteorology. See our episode  
“Why Life Exists” for more discussion 
of what emergent properties are.
 
The same applies to evolution too though, 
of it having multiple emergent layers.  
Sexual reproduction by swapping similar but very 
divergent DNA is one such, so is multicellularity,  
nerves, nervous systems, brains, large egg-laying 
animals, and child care and group coordination.  
We often call these survival strategies, 
but in some ways they’re less tactics  
for a shared board game than tactics for 
different board games with different rules,  
where the only shared trait is the objective 
to win, and winning is defined as not losing.  
I mentioned child care parenting strategies 
and group coordination, pack or herd behavior,  
a moment ago and that is another example of 
increasingly complex and emergent behavior.  
Evolution involving social animals is an emergent 
property of basic evolution but has different  
rules, trial and error starts getting replaced 
with some learned behavior for survivability,  
and even more so for very intelligent animals, 
where the change is so significant that we  
often say technological species don’t 
really evolve anymore. But of course  
technology is an emergent property of biology, and 
chemistry and physics, and of natural evolution.
 
So this is still true way down at the dumbest 
and smallest level. Remember that evolution is  
an emergent property of life that self-replicates 
and therefore can mutate – fundamentally DNA.
 
However, most of the DNA in your body 
has nothing to do with future evolution,  
heck most of the cells in your body 
don’t even undergo mitosis, or divide.  
Red Blood cells make up most of your cells, and 
have no DNA or Nucleus and don’t divide, white  
blood cells account for a lot of the remainder 
and can’t undergo mitosis in your bloodstream.  
They are both great examples of 
how perfected cellular evolution  
results in something stupidly specialized to the 
point of being utterly fragile to any changes,  
the very opposite of the adaptability we tend to 
consider most vital for the survival of bigger  
organisms. It’s a point worth remembering 
though, with the very existence of things  
like telomeres – which are like a countdown 
clock on how many times a given strand of DNA  
can replicate – being the exact opposite of what 
we’d expect evolution to produce on first glance.
 
Needless to say when we’re talking about survival 
we’re talking about the entire organism, a human  
not their DNA or their non-replicating blood 
cells, which is most of their cells, not including  
all the cells that aren’t human, like your 
mitochondria or all the gut bacteria in you, which  
combined outnumber all your other cells including 
those blood cells, and which you need to survive.  
Your eyeballs are full of DNA though, even 
if the blood cells bringing them food aren’t,  
and what exactly is the survival strategy of the 
cells in an eyeball? That organ we mentioned as  
a great example of convergent evolution. Those 
130 million rod cells and 7 million cone cells  
in your eye don’t really fit into that 
classic simplified definition of evolution:  
which is to get better and survive and 
make more of yourself, which each get  
a little better at not dying and making more 
of themselves that share that improvement. 
 
I’m not really sure where rods, cones, red blood 
cells, or mitochondria would fit into that,  
but they’re not separate organisms in and 
of themselves, not even mitochondria, not  
really. But then is an ant or worker bee really 
a separate organism, or is the hive that evolves?  
Multi-cellularity and sexual reproduction really 
shift that dynamic too because it becomes survival  
of a greater organism and survival of a 
species. Species is a bit of a dubious  
concept without sexual reproduction, all you’ve 
got is cells in constant division and divergence,  
a species is really more a concept for when 
not-too-distant-cousins can still swap DNA  
and produce a synthesis of themselves and their 
mutations. Nor should we say most organisms are  
part of that classic concept of species because 
most organisms are single-celled ones that divide,  
and it would be quite inaccurate to say they were 
not highly evolved, in their many quadrillions  
of numbers and trillions of generations.
So evolution, the survival of the fittest species,  
conceptually predates the existence of species 
and multicellular organisms. Or of cells, where it  
would date back to the earliest self-replicating 
protein that probably wouldn’t even be considered  
alive. And even those operate under very different 
mutation and reproduction methods than modern DNA.  
For instance, when DNA reproduces, there are 
often mistakes. After all there are literally  
billions of base pairs that need to be copied. 
Errors are actually pretty common but there  
are spell-checker mechanisms in place to catch 
them. Still, some inevitably make it through.  
Usually these mistakes, or mutations, are harmless 
and insignificant, but sometimes they are not. 
 
Also bear in mind DNA is not a blueprint as 
is often thought. It’s a program that runs and  
repeats. This means a very slight variation can 
have huge consequences as the DNA iterates. A case  
can be imagined where a slight variation in the 
shape of a fish’s fin allows it to swim a little  
faster, catch prey a little better, and so have 
more chances to have more and better offspring.  
Offspring that will be very likely to 
have those same weirdly shaped fins.
 
That’s more time than I’d like to have spent 
going over the concept of evolution but I  
wanted to stress that simultaneously simple and 
complex definition of it. On the one hand, it’s  
the simple process of random mutation resulting 
in future generations being more survivable,  
on the other hand, it’s a hundred 
different games with different rules,  
some of which rely very little on random mutation 
or survivability, anymore than a game of Chess,  
or Monopoly, or Call of Duty, rely on atoms and 
electron shuffling between them. They obviously  
do depend on that but you’d never seek to explain 
the difference in a board game, a first person  
shooter, and 4X space colonization game by 
getting into how quarks and leptons interact.
 
I think that’s important to keep in mind 
as we contemplate convergent evolution,  
because on the one hand we can expect that basic 
evolutionary concept to exist everywhere in the  
Universe where some sort of self-replication of 
pattern could occur, or anywhere in the multiverse  
even, but on the other hand, with a hundred 
different Survival Strategies in Evolution,  
of many levels of emergent rules, many 
entirely different genres of games,  
it would seem very unlikely we could expect any 
sort of parallel lifeforms from alien worlds.
 
On a third hand, since bilateral symmetry might 
not be universal, a lot of those games have the  
same winning strategy. Most of your DNA is junk 
and cludge, same as a lot of software code is,  
and it's entirely possible that two games in 
the same genre will share no code, especially if  
written from scratch on different worlds, though 
in general would have flat out cut-and-pasted  
segments of code from some predecessor bit of 
software in some analogy to mimicry or subsumption  
rather than reproduction. However, the winning 
approach in a lot of games is often very similar.  
4X videogames gain that name for the overall 
strategy rather than the individual tactics or  
themes – explore, expand, exploit, exterminate. 
Same overall strategy whether you’re exploring  
a fantasy or historical realm looking for rare 
resources and places to build villages or trying  
to wipe out hostile alien civilizations in a space 
opera themed war for galactic colonization and  
control. They’re a decent analogy for evolution 
too, get in one and grow to absorb and use all  
resources. And even inside these, minor variations 
can result in huge changes of approach.
 
And convergences too. In many a role-playing 
game, especially multi-player setups that allow  
for a cooperative specialized party, we see the 
appearance of character type often referred to  
as a ‘Glass Cannon” or a “Tank”, and the names are 
pretty indicative. The former is something pretty  
fragile able to hurl attacks at a distance, the 
other is something pretty much designed to take  
a beating. There are a lot of RPGs where 
neither is common or viable, but the basic  
concept was common enough that once the term 
popped up in discussion of some game or other  
it quickly spread to be regular gamer terminology 
even for systems with utterly different rules.
 
So convergent evolution in its simplest 
forms is analogous to cases like that.  
The idea that an eyeball is handy, or 
that the ability to absorb sunlight  
and make sugars with it photosynthetically 
is handy, or that copying DNA from another  
mutant relative is handy – which is weird to 
the basic principle of DNA pattern surviving  
since its literally hacking a big chunk of 
itself off to replace with something else.   
 
That’s the tricky part for discussing 
convergent evolution, because each of  
those evolutionary strategies that might get 
pursued and result in some sort of convergence.  
However they might each do that in some entirely 
different set of rules or level of rules  
and thus contemplating why we might see the same 
end product is going to be tricky and varied.  
Consider, it's pretty easy to look at nature 
and say “Well, four limbs, basically two arms  
and legs, is really common on Earth, and should 
be elsewhere” and there’s some truth to that,  
ignoring that critters with six or more limbs 
outnumber the 4-legged kind thousands to one,  
by which logic we should expect a lot more 
six-legged aliens than bipedal ones. 
 
Tetrapods are thought to have first 
appeared about 400 million years ago  
as a fish-like critter needed to start developing 
the ability to propel itself on land with fins,  
developing robust shoulders, hips, and pelvises, 
something tiny critters don’t need as much,  
making many legs cheaper. Ichthyostegalia 
– Ichthyo means fishlike incidentally – are  
extinct tetrapod amphibian precursor of all 
land living vertebrates, including those like  
snakes who got rid of their limbs or those 
like dolphins and whales who migrated back  
to the sea and picked up more fish-like traits. 
Our common ancestor with ants and other six-legged  
critters is way further back, and since the only 
shared trait for limbs is bilateral symmetry,  
we’d probably have to go back to about 600 million 
years ago. Life goes back considerably longer  
though and so we can hardly take for granted 
that bilateral symmetry is common let alone  
4-limbed bipedalism. Humans would probably 
never have gotten big-brained, super smart,  
and technical without a few particular paths 
occurring to us that are fairly unique to bipeds,  
and which aren’t obviously super-awesome 
traits anymore than bipedalism is.
 
We have efficient body plans, I’m not knocking the 
humanoid form, it is a good setup and one I’m fond  
of, but as an example, one of its advantages is 
being able to see further from the greater height  
by rearing up on back legs – which the giraffe’s 
approach achieves by a different and arguably  
better method. Another is that it lets you look 
much bigger than your weight class would indicate,  
be big and scary without needing as much mass, 
but the peacock and blowfish both have better  
approaches for looking big. Going back on your 
legs makes it easier to use your hands and lets  
them be more delicate, but growing an extra 
set, Centaur style, would seem even better,  
and delicacy of hand bones or toes is 
probably not exclusive to something which  
does not use them for feet in locomotion. 
Note that those are survival strategies  
– see far, look big, manipulate things, and carry 
– and the humanoid form is good for that but  
some monstrous centaur and giraffe hybrid with a 
kangaroo pouched side-mounted like saddlebags for  
carrying and that it could also expand with 
air bladders to look bigger or float on water  
would accomplish all those things the humanoid 
form does. So again it really matters what we mean  
by convergent evolution because the driving 
force for it is shared survival strategies,  
not physical shape and architecture, mostly. 
As mentioned the eyeball evolved a lot of times,  
the strategy there being that if one can 
detect changes to lighting and their direction,  
one can better see one’s landscape and 
other players on it, and act accordingly.  
Hence it’s pretty handy to be able to focus 
it, adjust the light sensitivity of it,  
protect it from damage, and move which way its 
pointing without moving the whole organism.  
So things like retinas, a sphere you can roll 
around, eyelids, and so on make a lot of sense and  
also represent a plausibly mutable pathway unlike 
things such as wheels and axles or gyroscopes.
 
We also want to be careful assuming 
there’s any shared architecture.  
For instance that swiveling capacity 
for eyes is also handy for ears,  
cats can swivel theirs and get a lot more data 
out of that then we do with our fixed ears,  
and even then we can do a lot with that, 
but directional hearing lets you pin  
direction and distance down much better. We 
might wonder why we haven't got them and we  
also might wonder why we don’t have more than 
two eyes. Wouldn’t a pair of eyes on your palms  
or fingertips, or some audio or visual sensitivity 
there, be very helpful? Yes, very, and so we might  
expect that in nature but we don't get it because 
eyeballs need a lot of brain and nerves to run on,  
we’re talking a big fiber optic trunkline not a 
little Bluetooth connection. That would be a lot  
of resources and material, and is probably the 
main reason your eyes are close to your brain,  
keeps the connection real short, in terms of 
signal lag time and signal handling cords. 
 
Now that would probably be why we see few 
occasions of more eyes or of eyes farther from the  
brain, it’s too pricey for too little gain, but 
a critter whose nervous system ran on different  
hardware, like on actual fiber optics moving 
at light speed, wouldn’t have either problem.  
Shared ancestry, shared basic code and hardware, 
like modern programs sharing the same bit of code  
for controlling mouse or keyboard input, can 
limit the biological options available. Hard to  
grow useful mutant eyeballs on your backside 
if it means mutating a whole new trunkline  
for data back to there and some new trunkline 
material for the nerves, to let them be cheaper.  
Some beneficial mutation might be very at odds 
with existing hardware even if with some other  
previously inferior hardware the new combination 
might be vastly better. No shared ancestry, none  
of that shared hardware. We don’t even know that 
whatever passed for biology on that planet would  
resemble ours in methods, it could be an emergent 
property of chemistry still but one so different  
as to be no more like our biology than geology 
is, another emergent system from chemistry. 
 
In a case like that is the eyeball still evolving? 
Well the eyeball strategy is probably just as  
valid, it depends a lot on the world of course. 
So subterranean lifeforms living in the crevices  
of an icy moon of Neptune and operating at 
a snail’s speed don’t gain as much off that  
optic investment. They might have supercheap 
and fast nerves running at light speed on thin  
veins of platinum for nerves, but move slower 
than that snail with virtually no musculature.  
The basic paradigm still holds of having 
good intelligence – in both the sense of  
knowing what everything else is up to and 
being able to make good guesses and plans,  
but might not go in for visual or auditory 
signals and probably doesn’t need much  
turnover of ‘frames’. If everything moves a 
millimeter a day, rather than meter per second,  
a vision composed of many images per second 
is pretty big overkill but it might be really  
cheap for their biology. If you’re a billionaire, 
spending a hundred times as much for a slightly  
better item doesn’t mean much if the item costs 
a penny and the other a buck. Many mutations  
only need a few lines of code, so to speak, 
and our DNA is billions of base pairs long.
 
Something can be pretty useless or need 
less resources and upkeep and still evolve,  
and persist in distant descendants that have 
little use for it. As a software analogy,  
I generally do my writing in Microsoft Word 
and it's been my go-to since WYSIWYG was all  
the new rage in word processors and typewriters 
were still the norm. That software package has  
all sorts of features I personally nearly never 
use like the Web Layout Function and other one  
most folks don’t use but I do like the Mail Merge 
capability. It has all sorts of things which were  
big deals at the time but don’t really matter to 
most folks now, but it rarely loses a feature. 
 
Those who remember Clippy, that annoying Office 
Assistant from 1997, were almost all universally  
happy when it stopped being turned on by default 
in 2001 and was removed altogether in 2007.  
As the most visible and hated feature of that 
software, it wasn’t good for its survivability,  
whereas most others remain even when barely useful 
because it takes little or no effort to remove  
them and more to take them out, and sometimes 
they are handy, Clippy was deemed an actual  
threat to survival. So evolution is not just 
about gaining handy traits, it's about getting  
rid of really bad ones, and often retaining stuff 
that is mostly neither good or bad. This is common  
in software that sees edition after edition 
– indeed also in a lot of games, legal codes,  
and administrative systems. Also in life forms, 
most of your DNA is that sort of scrap code. 
 
That’s part of why genetic engineering is 
hard, its tricky to predict what a bit of  
DNA is going to do when a lot of it is 
going to do an awful lot of not much.  
Let’s hypothesize a random organ that did 
an awful lot of not very much for some  
critter that had inherited it – neither very 
useful or a detriment, just something minor.  
When a non-functioning version of it finally 
mutates, and some other luck causes that to  
breed true to that clade of those critters, we 
now have a useless bit of junk. It could persist  
for quite a while. If your typical strand of 
DNA was popping up 10 errors per generation  
on a code of billion pairs, and the code for that 
organ is 1000 pairs long, you only have a 1 in  
100,000 chance per generation of any further 
mutation to that organ, with only a further  
50/50 shot of it being inherited to a child.
All of human existence back to when fire was  
neat and all the rage is about 100,000 
generations so you’d only be looking  
at even odds of further mutation happening 
there to either repair it or get rid of it.  
Over-simplified example incidentally, humans may 
have only 100,000 generations in that time but  
there’s a bunch of us alive in every generation 
with a chance of that organ’s DNA mutating,  
not one set of cloning DNA, resulting in tons 
of mutations to that piece of DNA happening,  
and the big thing about heredity is that if 
any of those mutations was a major positive  
it ups the odds of it being passed on. 
We don’t actually know if alien DNA would be as  
prone to mutation as ours either – ours actually 
has data integrity evolved into it these days,  
but there’s ways to do that 
even better with fewer errors,  
something we’ve discussed before for ensuring our 
safety from robots and self-replicating machines  
we might make. On the other hand, evolving an 
immunity to mutation is a bit of an amusing  
mutation – not necessarily an impossible one 
though, indeed we have ultraconserved elements  
in the human genome and other data integrity 
methods, but too low a rate of mutation really  
hinders adaptations to environmental shifts and a 
total immunity or near-total immunity to mutation  
might be very dangerous, especially if it 
applied to an organism's entire genetic code. 
 
Alternatively, life on worlds with high radiation, 
which damages chemical bonds and alters the code,  
might have very high rates of mutation 
not just due to copying errors.  
In which case you’d need to protect critical 
biological processes, possibly through some  
sort of error correction or redundancy strategy. 
Strangely, there may be some type of evolutionary  
radiological Goldilocks zone depending on 
the chemistry and data integrity involved,  
where the mutation rate is fast enough for 
beneficial changes to occur frequently, but slow  
enough to allow the stability for those mutations 
to play out in more complex systems. This is one  
potential Fermi Paradox Solution incidentally, 
and one of the better ones in my opinion.
 
Mutation is already slower in big organisms 
because we tend to have much longer generations,  
bacteria are vastly more evolved than humans 
because our generations are decades not days.  
Indeed humans are – in terms of generations 
since life originated – probably the least  
evolved animal, not the most evolved as we tend 
to think of ourselves. We are usually viewed as  
the absolute pinnacle of survival because that 
intelligence strategy is seen as so optimum when  
it works, but it could also be the absolutely 
most suicidal one, permitting you to blow up  
your world so thoroughly only bacteria survives. 
Whereas rapidly mutating tiny bacteria follow  
the strategy of constant fast and divergent 
breeding around an ultra-simple premise.
 
All of which tells us that Convergent Evolution to 
the Humanoid form is very nearly ridiculous – it  
is a good, efficient shape but not a preferred 
one over all of others or optimal for all the  
different environments. However, that convergence 
to human intelligence is probably less ridiculous,  
for critters pursuing the big brain strategy, 
and many of the behaviors and social structures  
we have might be convergent. Those survival 
strategies mostly are convergent, they are  
fundamentally what each mutation and shift in 
environment and ecosystem shift around so that  
organisms have to shift which survival strategy or 
combination of them they operate on. However, they  
often represent a mental concept or emotion too. 
While I generally find discussion of the  
evolutionary origins of social constructs or 
emotions over-reductionist and often pretty  
dubious in individual examples, the core concept 
seems valid. Love, friendship, and so on permit  
organisms to function together even when the 
advantage is lopsided or partially detrimental.  
Indeed our concept for what’s a parasite rather 
than a symbiote or partner or child arguably  
boils down to if the lop-sided arrangement offers 
only harm or does not benefit that species while  
harming an individual member of it. Parasite 
and carnivorous behavior and food chains all  
seem like convergent evolutionary examples too. 
Needless to say concepts like justice or fairness  
or hierarchical authority or parental authority 
or loyalty are all things we wouldn’t expect to  
be very rare because they represent concepts, 
survival strategies, in those more basic  
and universal forms. Convergence to concepts 
necessary or beneficial for higher technology  
seems very likely, curiosity, working 
together, fair play, friendship, and so on.
 
So, ironically even though there is not one 
atom of justice in this entire Universe, not  
one shred of DNA for Fair Play, justice might be 
something all civilizations converge to evolving,  
Universal Justice for All, regardless of how many 
limbs, tentacles, or eyeballs you may have.
 
One of the more awesome parts of my job is 
getting to work with other creative talents  
like authors and game designers, and I’ve got 
a growing shelf of books sent to me by authors  
who say I’ve inspired their work in some way, 
which is both awesome and humbling. The newest  
addition to that is “To Sleep in a Sea of Stars” 
by Christopher Paolini, author of the New York  
Times Bestseller Eragon and the Inheritance Cycle 
series, along with the film of that name with the  
always-excellent Jeremy Irons in it. Turns out 
Chris is a fan of our show and it inspired him  
to include orbital rings in the worldbuilding. 
I ended up grabbing the audiobook too as I tend to  
prefer to listen these days and the narrator was 
Jennifer Hale, who I remember best as Commander  
Shepard from Mass Effect, and she did her usual 
amazing job. A good narrator can make a good book  
great, and a great narrator can make a great book 
epic, and so I’m very happy to name “To Sleep in a  
Sea of Stars” our Audible Audiobook of the Month.
Now Audible is this show’s first and longest  
running sponsor, helping keep us in production for 
over 5 years now, but I’ve been a fan of there’s  
for nearly two decades and amusingly one of the 
first audiobooks I got with them was Eragon.  
I love audiobooks and nobody has done more to make 
them affordable and easy to access than Audible,  
and these days their collection is over 300 years 
worth of performances and is growing every day. 
 
However they’re not just about audiobooks, they 
also have podcasts, guided wellness programs,  
theatrical performances, A-list 
comedy, and exclusive Audible  
Originals you won’t find anywhere else.
And it also includes their Plus catalog,  
a collection of thousands of titles 
you can listen to freely as a member,  
and speaking of Free, if you’d like to try out 
Audible and that Plus Catalog, the first month is  
free if you visit Audible dot com slash isaac or 
text isaac to 500-500. That also gives you access  
to great deals on other books, like Christopher 
Paolini’s “To Sleep in a Sea of Stars” , and those  
titles are yours to keep for life, whether you 
stay as a member or not, and again you can try  
it out for free now, just visit Audible dot 
com slash isaac or text isaac to 500-500.
 
As another quick note, since we’ve a lot 
of authors or aspiring authors on the show,  
Chris Paolini got his first bestseller 
published when he was still a teenager  
and he does have a youtube channel too 
that’s got some great videos on writing tips,  
which are definitely worth checking out.
All right, that will wrap up our look at  
Convergent Evolution. Next week we’ll take a look 
at the notion of artificial intelligence being  
used for crimes, or being criminals themselves. 
Then we’ll close the month out with our Livestream  
Q&A on Sunday October 31st… Halloween, at 
4pm Eastern Time. Then we’ll open November  
up with a look at how we’ll be opening our road to 
space, with an episode on Earth-based Spaceports.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to  
us on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, 
and patreon and our website are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
