Today we'll be talking about walking cities.  
Cities on the go. Because there are 
no clickbait titles on this show.
So, today’s topic is mobile cities and we’ll be 
covering everything from small settlements to big  
moving metropolises, from those floating on sea 
or in the sky to those running around on giant  
legs like a spider tank, or big tank treads, like 
the behemoths we saw in the film Mortal Engines. 
Now, to some degree, we don’t need to know the 
reasons why we might want a city to be mobile,  
just how to make it work. It’s such a cool 
concept that we’d be interested in looking at it  
regardless of whether it’s practical or not. That 
said, there are some compelling reasons that we  
might want to have a mobile city, either cultural 
or pragmatic, and we’ll get to those later.  
We’ll take a look at some of the examples 
in science fiction, from the crazy to the  
more plausible, but we’ll also ask how 
we could make these things practical and  
what sorts of cultures might make them so.
We also need to acknowledge from the outset  
that all cities are mobile already. If you 
look at maps of cities over generations,  
they tend to creep around the landscape like some 
sort of amoeba blob. There have been cases where  
entire cities have been moved by disassembling 
and moving the very stones they’re made from,  
like Kiruna, Sweden that is currently being 
moved 3 kilometers east, building by building,  
a process that will take over a decade 
and is planned to be complete in 2035. 
Today we’re contemplating considerably 
faster-moving ones, but those moving around  
within a world, not orbiting it or some immense 
spaceship or habitat that itself moves like an  
arkship or O’Neill Cylinder. And, we’re also not 
really thinking about cities that are established  
and expected to be permanent, but instead end up 
being moved for another reason -- in history, this  
is the bulk of the examples. For instance, where a 
city needed to be moved away from a specific place  
due to the construction of a dam that would leave 
the area flooded, or needed to be moved off of a  
flood plain or to higher ground because of rising 
sea levels. Instead, we’re looking for settlements  
that move around by land, sea, or air, or maybe on 
ice or lava too, and possibly even disassembling  
and reassembling itself periodically.
In the end, so long as you’ve got a  
couple key technologies, you can absolutely 
make these sorts of moving cities work.  
That can be ultra-energy abundance so that 
you don’t really care how much juice it takes  
to run your giant S.H.I.E.L.D. Heli-carrier to 
ultra-airtight durable tanks that you can fill  
with helium and not worry it will leak out, or 
better access to cheap helium, which may be ultra  
abundant on some worlds. Or hydrogen-resistant 
coatings, or just good old-fashioned anti-gravity.  
We’ll discuss those options and more in a bit, but 
the real problem with mobile cities isn’t if you  
can build one, but for what reasons you would.
The key question is to ask why you would move  
a whole city instead of just sending out rovers 
to collect what you need and bring it back. This  
seems pretty obvious to us now, where most of us 
live in permanent houses or apartment buildings.  
but we certainly have precedent for moving whole 
settlements. It is literally what the nomad life  
is all about, and has been an extremely common 
approach to living throughout human history. Nor  
is it absent in the modern world even today, with 
things like recreational vehicles and houseboats,  
and #vanlife trending on social media fairly 
regularly. One difficulty with nomadic life  
is it tends to limit you to what you can carry, 
and you need to make do with no infrastructure,  
but we shouldn’t take that for granted 
that weight restriction is as important  
in a higher-tech civilization or to a culture to 
which being nomadic is vital to their way of life. 
Higher tech options can decrease mass or 
make it easier to carry mass. After all,  
how heavy is a wall between rooms, or a floor, 
if it’s made out of some super strong material  
and highly insulated against heat and sound? 
How heavy is it if every wall is actually a  
tank you can fill with water or fuel for more 
insulation and as storage? Or with Helium? How  
many rooms does a house really need when your 
residents are packed full of augmentations  
allowing them to watch shows or plug into VR 
without any gear, just direct neural linkage? 
Spaceships are all about mass, not size, so a 
lot of colony vessels to new star systems might  
be adapted to cultures that put a big focus on 
minimizing the mass of personal accommodations  
and gear, and that could easily translate 
into the eventual colony on a new world. 
We probably need to start by asking what 
sort energies are involved in walking,  
floating, or levitating some giant city, 
which probably needs to start by asking  
how much a city weighs and emphasis 
on weighs because some giant land  
crawler running around the Moon leaching 
minerals and Helium-3 off the surface is  
a lot easier to roll around than some 
giant tank on a high-gravity planet. 
One upside though, is that unless we’re talking 
high-speed cities, we can mostly ignore air  
resistance, which is another reason why weight 
is more important than mass in this discussion.  
Either way, what is the weight? I’ve seen a 
number of loose napkin math estimates for an  
entire city weight, 10 billion tons for New York 
City was one figure and with a decent value for  
the approximation, but I suspect ships like oil 
tankers and aircraft carriers is your better  
basis for an estimate. Those tend to be in the 
hundred of thousands of tons range, not billions,  
which is five orders of magnitude smaller. Though 
also home to a thousandth the people, so maybe we  
could estimate 10-100 tons per person loosely.
Bigger vehicles tend to get better mileage per  
ton than small ones, especially at lower speeds, 
tanks and semi’s are way more fuel efficient than  
even the best modern sedans, in tons per miles 
per fuel used, but none of those are truly big.  
While the biggest vehicles in terms of raw mass 
are giant bucket excavators for mining coal,  
for a while the space industry had the biggest 
land vehicle. Or vehicles. NASA’s twin transport  
crawlers for rockets, Hanz and Fraz, originally 
designed to carry 2700 tons or 6 million pounds,  
and were each 40 meters or 131 feet long by 35 
meters or 114 feet wide. Their newer upgrades push  
that capacity to 8200 tonnes or 18 million pounds. 
It might be surprising that its engines are only a  
few thousand horsepower, the typical personal 
vehicle being a couple hundred. Essentially,  
you’d only need one horsepower per ton, 
which makes intuitive sense anyway, given  
an actual horse could pull a ton easily enough.
Those crawlers burned around 300 liters of diesel  
per kilometer or 125 gallons per mile, and they 
typically made their trip at a mile per hour.  
So they weren’t fast, they moved about half or 
a third of the average person’s walking speed.  
But for context, if you built a city on such a 
platform, it could move itself from New York to  
LA in a little over a hundred days, and at a fuel 
efficiency of around 20 miles a gallon per ton. 
This sort of platform can be made bigger and 
faster, and while diesel engines or going  
steampunk is visually tempting, let’s switch 
over to electric and imagine a nuclear powered  
one instead, and for simplicity we’ll assume one 
kilowatt of power production will let us equal  
a horsepower or move one ton of city at a slow 
walking pace. We’re just aiming for some easy  
to recall figure accurate to an order of magnitude 
here. In that same vein, 20 kilograms per kilowatt  
of power is reasonable for a ship reactor, 
or 50 kilowatts a ton, 50 times what we need  
to move that ton, so it’s pretty plausible you 
could have a city that was less than a tenth its  
mass in reactors, engines, and actual wheels, 
axles, tracks, et cetera, without needing to  
assume any really advanced hyper technology.
Needless to say, if we’re talking about a  
megaship or floating island, it’s even easier 
than moving across the ground, and the same for  
a mostly buoyant airship or sky city. If you want 
it running as a big helicopter or airplane - which  
would be faster too, you’re adding an order of 
magnitude to your energy budget, if you’re putting  
this thing on a significantly lower-gravity 
world, Mercury or Mars, or the Moon, then it’s  
an order of magnitude less energy needed.
So, this is surprisingly a very plausible  
concept on the Moon, where your mobile mining 
platform might actually run on solar power and  
need to creep across the landscape over the 
Moon’s month-long day-night cycle to remain  
always in sunlight. Even at the equator, the 
day-night terminator only moves at just under  
10 miles per hour, or just over 15 kilometers 
per hour, and is much lower closer to the poles.  
It would need to be even slower on Mercury or 
Venus, and a lot of the bigger moons in the  
outer solar system have very long days too due 
to them being tidally locked to their planet. 
As to why you would build that way, well it 
takes a lot of additional gear to move and  
work safely in a vacuum with people - part of 
why we like robots - so a big mobile miner on  
an airless low gravity planet or moon would seem 
to make more sense, especially as you can get away  
with giant and ultra-lightweight solar masts where 
there’s no wind and where all your terrain is dry  
as a bone. All your crew and equipment is right 
there, all inside nice thick hulls and airlocks. 
Another thing to keep in mind is that on a place 
like Earth, we do have the option of buoyancy in  
the atmosphere, and we mostly don’t use it because 
helium - the second most common substance in the  
Universe - is ultra-rare on Earth. Hydrogen, the 
most common substance in the Universe, is also  
not terribly common on Earth either, and also 
has the quality of being incredibly explosive,  
which isn’t so great for safety. They both are way 
lighter than air as molecules, great for buoyancy,  
but they leak through things. If you have tanks 
that are lightweight, sturdy, and air tight,  
you can effectively have a long lasting 
floating balloon that rarely needs replacing. 
We don’t necessarily need an entirely buoyant 
structure floating over the landscape,  
but if you can make strong durable parts that 
are hollow but filled with lightweight gas,  
or even vacuum if you can make them strong enough,  
an awful lot of your structural weight might be 
decreased while adding in a lot of buoyancy to  
cut weight down. Needless to say, some sort of 
awesome anti-gravity technology is even better. 
That’s really the only way you can get 
away with airborne floating fortresses or  
upside down mountains with cities on them, 
which are so popular in the fantasy genre,  
like the wizard-enclave cities of Netheril 
in the Forgotten Realms. They are usually  
doing it by some variation of magic, but 
barring antigravity you can only do that  
if all that height and depth is made out of 
net-buoyant material, which rock obviously isn’t. 
Different planets, different options 
though. For instance, on Hycean Worlds,  
your surface gravity would generally be a bit 
higher than on Earth, as these are bigger planets  
which we assume have a high concentration of 
free hydrogen and helium in the atmosphere  
and maybe very deep oceans below, but very high 
pressure at the surface, be it land or sea. So,  
much like on the airless worlds, a self-contained 
large mobile environment makes more sense, and  
normal air might be naturally buoyant at standard 
pressure, but you can grab hydrogen or helium out  
of the air and superheat them with waste heat 
from your reactors for a good lifting gas too. 
Just keeping to our earlier figure of needing a 
kilowatt a ton to move a big land crawler on an  
Earth-like planet, and more if you want to go 
faster, we should probably note the viability  
of this is very dependent on your energy cost and 
vehicle maintenance cost. If you’ve got some scifi  
sturdy material like adamantium to be building 
your tracks and axles out of, and some fusion  
reactor gushing out megawatts for pennies, yeah 
this sort off mobile city works just fine. And in  
point of fact, is a lot cheaper to move around 
than those big mobile space habitats we often  
discuss, especially at the interplanetary scale.
We’re also assuming the roaming cities are  
self-propelled in this case, but you could have 
dome habitats, even very large ones, that we built  
with being lifted in mind and many such mobile 
cities exist but are stationary until swarms of  
big heavy lifters come by to move one, then head 
off to help migrate one of its sister cities. 
It’s not really a weight issue either, even in a 
modern context. Your typical modern home masses  
between 40-80 tons, so using our earlier figure 
from the NASA crawler, you’d only be burning 2-4  
gallons of diesel per mile you wanted to move, 
and at modern costs that would be 10-20 dollars  
a mile, and moving halfway across the state 
might only cost a few thousand bucks, which  
is certainly a better option than many days spent 
packing and unpacking, and all the time and cost  
with realtors and movers. It’s not really that we 
would expect a post-scarcity civilization to have  
every house have its own means of transport, but 
it might get a lot more plausible that ‘mobile  
home’ in a future context, might mean one built 
with the idea that you could untether the house  
and then some massive megacopter could swing by, 
attach tethers, and lift some 500 ton mansion to  
your new preferred address, possibly all during a 
single afternoon while you’re off running errands  
and without even spilling the water glass 
you forgot and left on the kitchen table. 
Which is a thing to remember in terms of these 
big mobile cities, you would expect them to be  
vibrating and shifting around a lot and quite 
loud. I remember riding around in big tracked  
vehicles in the Army a lot and it’s definitely not 
a place you can really sleep or concentrate in,  
even with practice. Or at least I couldn't, we 
did have a couple guys in the unit who could  
nap inside the things somehow, even when we were 
bumping along at high speed, so presumably that  
is something people could adapt to. So too, 
you’ve got stuff jarring around and spilling,  
but ships already have to deal with that and there 
are plenty of folks who spend much or even most  
of their life on ships. Bigger ones sway around 
less too. Some civilization living in a mobile  
tracked city or artificial island dwarfing an 
aircraft carrier might not have that much shaking  
and swaying going on, and after a few generations 
might be totally adapted in habit and custom too. 
There are things you could do to dampen that noise 
and vibration. Arguably, big long telescoping  
legs are better than tracks for that. Though 
as awesome as a giant walking city would be,  
I really have difficulty justifying that option 
outside of highly cratered and creviced moons,  
where it’s just easier to walk around in the low 
gravity and have your city on big spider legs  
than wheels or tracks. Also, it’s important to 
remember the weight with things having feet. Some  
big tracked vehicle that has nearly as much track 
surface area as the vehicle has would leave huge  
ruts on anything but very hard ground, and the 
bigger a critter is, the even larger its feet need  
to be to distribute its weight so it doesn’t sink 
- just like walking on soft ground wearing riding  
boots vs. high heel shoes. Same for sturdiness of 
leg bones - you need them to be strong and stable  
enough so they don’t buckle under the weight 
as you move. Wide and flat works better for a  
mobile city, not some skyscraper with legs, and if 
you’re doing legs, it may be better to emulate the  
centipede, not the biped, or even the arachnid.
So far, we’ve mostly talked about moving across  
the ground, but there are more options for 
moving in water or some other liquid. A mobile  
city might be a submarine, moving around water 
or some other fluid by propellers and buoyancy,  
like the giant city-sub Universalis in 
the book Undersea, which roams around for  
resources as well as to stay out of danger and 
away from its rival city-sub, the Population.  
It might be a big sphere of a city moving through 
an ice world by slowly melting its way around the  
ice. Or floating around lava, not water, or moving 
through a planetary mantle, which might occur on  
a Chthonian or Volcanic Planet. Those worlds 
might even allow for magnetic levitation in  
many cases. Others might have cities hanging from 
huge orbital rings by tethers, like the Chandelier  
Cities we discussed in Colonizing Neptune..
We still haven’t really covered why you’re  
moving though. And that is a problem that we can’t 
really handwave, as it's often not going to make  
sense to move a city. It definitely does in some 
cases though, and a big spaceship designed for  
continuous thrust, powered by a torch drive or 
a micro-black hole, might just land and power  
down on a planet like a giant skyscraper or 
arcology, or even just roll over the surface  
with the engine on, though unless it is using 
something more benign like neutrinos or dark  
matter for its thrust, it would be like rolling 
over the landscape with a giant flamethrower. 
But let’s start with the easier-to-justify cases. 
Floating cities on Venus or huge gas refineries  
on Jupiter or Neptune, where movable cities 
are basically the only option for being there.  
On a place like Mercury, you’re doing it to stay 
out of the Sun, which moves over many months. So  
there you could have some big mobile city trying 
to stay in the dark where it's cooler to do its  
mining, moving on over days, and that place might 
even use stilts and legs and have a big reflective  
umbrella over it, one of the mushroom habitats we 
discussed in Colonizing Mercury, for being on the  
day side, since walking with feet means way less 
touching of the ultra hot ground, letting you keep  
a livable temperature inside the facility.
The episode is Mobile Cities, so we are  
contemplating ones that are stationary most of the 
time and can just be moved, and we have tons of  
historical and modern examples of that, from tent 
cities to huge caravans of recreational vehicles.  
The main reason for mobility in those examples 
is that whatever the lifeblood of that city is,  
is moving -- for example: following migrating 
animals for food or sport or entertainment.  
In our Hiveworlds episode earlier this year I 
mentioned an example of the Hive City of Nessus,  
from Gene Wolfe’s Dying Earth series “Book of 
the New Sun”. There, the city is slowly moving  
away from the original spaceport that was the old 
city as it heads down a river as the planet slowly  
freezes. It just moves over time and folks raid 
and rob the mostly abandoned buildings of prior  
generations. Mobile cities pillaging the world 
definitely work well in more dystopian settings,  
be they post-apocalyptic or Dying Earth, but it’s 
viable in other cases too, even on modern Earth. 
And also, it’s important to note that 
although most mobile cities are moving  
towards something that its inhabitants want 
- like more resources or better weather,  
a city also might want to move away from 
something it doesn’t want -- be it a political  
threat or even bad weather. We could imagine a 
mining operation wanting to pull up and out of  
dodge if a super-strong storm developed 
on the planet or moon it was working on,  
or if a volcano started to erupt and 
threatened to melt it completely. 
Moving around based on either wanting to go 
towards something or away from it is obviously  
very common in hunter-gatherer cultures but it’s 
normal enough in agrarian ones too. In the Plain  
States like Kansas, it really isn’t unusual for 
harvesting those vast fields of wheat to involve  
basically a rolling wall of vehicles and a lot 
of harvesters to make a 1500 mile trek from there  
up to Canada, just harvesting fields as they 
go. I could imagine a world in which that was  
state-owned, or organized where some single huge 
mobile harvester, miles wide and fairly thick,  
just rolled non-stop over the monocrop 
field both night and day, same for planting,  
and was just a mobile town, complete with 
shops and schools and churches and such. 
But a mobile city might not need to use much power 
either, especially if it relies on other things  
that can move it, like ocean currents or wind 
patterns. The Raft in Neal Stephenson’s Snow Crash  
comes to mind here. The black-market hub city was 
a loosely connected flotilla of ships instead of a  
single structure, and being that it was too big 
to steer in any meaningful way, it mostly moved  
by ocean currents, with some slight diesel power 
to get it to the right places, and traveled all  
around the Pacific over the span of several years.
So, that example brings us to the next thing to  
consider -- a mobile city also need not 
be a single huge machine, it might be a  
bunch of components that can move separately 
and reassemble on the end, or separate for a  
while and then rejoin into a larger group, or move 
together staying loosely connected the whole time.  
The Freedom Ship proposal, which was more 
like a fleet of barges than a single ship,  
was designed as mobile community of up 
to 80,000, and we discussed that general  
concept more in Seasteading, where you might 
have a lot of square or hexagonal standardized  
components that could just link back together as 
a grid of whatever arrangement you wanted, and  
with bits coming or going, migrating themselves.
The same applies to floating cities in the sky,  
or on gas giants, or places like Venus. There 
are a few practical reasons you might want to  
do this too. For any kind of seasonal shift, 
it might make sense to reconfigure the city to  
take advantage of the different temperatures, 
available resources or any number of things  
that come on a cycle. These need not be external 
forces either, it’s easy to imagine any number of  
cultural reasons to reconfigure or move a city 
based purely on human whims -- like the Aurora  
Borealis? Move North according to the 11-year 
solar cycle so you’re more likely to catch them.  
Or avoid the rainy West Coast of North America 
for the peaks of the El-Nino Southern Oscillation  
cycle and instead enjoy more sun by floating 
your city near Japan where it’ll be sunnier.  
And while you’re at it, why not reconfigure 
the city to get rid of all tall buildings for  
optimal moon viewing for the tsukimi, the 
traditional autumn moon-viewing festival. 
As for how to get it done, it is all about the 
technology you have on hand. For instance, the  
cityship of Atlantis from the Stargate Franchise 
is first shown to us as a fully functional  
spaceship, able to travel between galaxies, and 
we frequently contemplate giant spaceships bigger  
than cities on this show for mundane interstellar 
colonization, and whole planet-ships for  
intergalactic colonization. So it’s worth keeping 
in mind that those spaceships, while not designed  
for atmospheric travel or orbital insertion, 
wouldn’t generally have a problem floating  
around on an ocean. Or under one for that matter, 
even without the powerful forcefield Atlantis  
uses for deep diving itself in that show.
If you’ve got shields and abundant energy  
or anti-grav, then it all works just fine. Low 
gravity makes it easier too. In the John Carter  
Film, set on low-gravity Mars, the Zodanga have 
a mobile city, though they don’t have that in the  
original books, just the film. Mortal Engines does 
have it in the film and the book, the Traction  
Cities, that can move around that post-apocalyptic 
landscape to avoid earthquakes and volcanoes and  
so on, and eat other cities, moving or not. The 
notion of Municipal Darwinism in the setting is  
a fascinating one, albeit I couldn’t rate it as 
super-realistic. We see a couple other examples  
in the Warhammer 40,000 setting too, Ambulon from 
the Dark Heresy setting that migrates between  
different types of resources it needs. Floating 
ones like Atlantis are common too, the video  
game Civilization: Beyond Earth has migrating 
floating settlements in the Rising Tide DLC. 
And again, the fantasy genre loves them, the 
floating cities of the wizard kings of Netheril  
from the Forgotten Realms or the flying castles 
from Dragonlance come to mind, and there are  
tons more. They’re also quite the staple of the 
Steampunk Genre, be they tracked, or ones walking  
around on legs. I can think of lots of various 
plausible scenarios for world setups or cultures  
or combinations of technology that might make such 
places reasonably common, but probably never the  
main way humanity housed itself. On planets 
anyway, as channel regulars know, we tend to  
assume most humans would live on artificial space 
habitats like O’Neill Cylinders in the future,  
and those are inherently mobile. And in that 
regard, we would assume mobile cities would be the  
norm for humanity, whether it’s orbiting a planet 
or migrating around to new asteroids to mine,  
or turning the engines on and moving your whole 
giant O’Neill Cylinder to a different region of  
the solar system, or even a new solar system.
So yes, mobile cities will be a thing in the  
future, probably both on and off planets.
How well they match up with their portrayals  
in fiction is hard to say, but whether 
or not those portrayals are realistic,  
I think as we move into the future, there will 
definitely be a place for moving cities too.
Last week we were talking about Lunar Mining and 
Refining and after I finished that episode I felt  
something missing was looking at the lives 
Miners on the Moon might have, particularly  
Nomadic prospectors, and today’s topic reminded 
me we can build huge mobile mining platforms that  
might be as populated as an offshore oil rig or 
small town. So I did a bonus episode - Nomadic  
Miners on the Moon - which is available now 
exclusively on Nebula, our streaming service,  
where every episode comes out early and ad free, 
both our videos and our audio-only podcasts. No  
ads or sponsor reads, like this one.
If you subscribe to Nebula, not only  
do you get to see every regular episode 
of SFIA a few days early and ad free,  
but we have lots of bonus content, including 
extended editions of many episodes, as well as  
bonus and exclusive content, like Nomadic Miners, 
Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology,  
Planets Vs Megastructures, Space Freighters, 
Colonizing Binary Stars, and many more. 
Nebula is a streaming service started by creators 
for creators and their audiences, and has grown to  
be the largest creator owned streaming service, 
with tons of great content from an ever-growing  
community of creators. Using my link and discount 
it’s available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode,  
and it goes to supporting new content from 
myself and other creators, like our new feature,  
Nebula Classes, so its 2 for the price of 1.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my 
code, isaacarthur, you not only get access  
to all of the great stuff Nebula offers plus now 
Classes, you’ll also be directly supporting this  
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, 
and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
If you’ve finished up today’s topic  
and still want more, we have a NSS Space Forum 
tonight, Thursday July 13, 9 PM Eastern Time,  
where Dr. Doug Plata will be discussing the 
Instabase concept for inflatable habitats for  
using on the Moon or Mars. You can check that 
out live and ask questions, or catch it and any  
of our prior other weekly forums over on the 
National Space Society’s own Youtube Channel. 
And speaking of the Moon, we’ll be looking 
at the possibility of building a Lunar Space  
Elevator on August 3rd, but before then we still 
have plenty more content for the rest of July,  
continuing this weekend, with our mid-month scifi 
Sunday episode, Robots and Warfare, and a look at  
the role drones and autonomous machines might have 
in the future, along with finding out what the  
first Rule of Warfare in the future will be. After 
that we’ll discuss whether or not alien lifeforms  
might be based on ammonia instead of water, and 
what that might look like. Then we’ll continue our  
look at the future of warfare with Dropships 
and planetary invasions or boarding actions. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
