We often wonder where we might find a truly 
sustainable and abundant source of energy,  
and the answer might turn out to 
be in the emptiness all around us.
Today we will be looking at Zero Point Energy, 
with a particular emphasis on the type known as  
Vacuum Energy and the Casimir Effect, and as 
usual we’ll be aiming to make these concepts  
a lot simpler and intuitive, rather than the 
mysterious technobabble presentation they  
tend to get in science fiction, and sometimes 
even in science. We are going to be discussing  
some sci-fi examples though, so if you’ve ever 
wondered how the ZPMs of Stargate SG-1 worked,  
grab a drink and snack, settle in for a bit, 
and hit those like and subscribe buttons. 
To understand anything involving zero point or 
vacuum energy, we need a little bit of quantum  
mechanics, and critical to that notion is that 
the Universe seems to have its equivalents of  
minimum sized building blocks or pixels. 
Stuff that you can’t cut in half further,  
not able to be divided more, which is what the 
term atom means, although we later found out you  
could go to protons, neutrons, and electrons, 
and the proton and neutron down into quarks. 
You’ve probably heard that a proton or 
neutron is made of three quarks too,  
and this is mostly wrong and we’ll get 
to why shortly but the reason why it’s  
wrong is critical to our topic today. Currently 
though, we believe electrons are not divisible  
and neither are quarks, that they are fundamental 
particles, though plenty of theories like String  
Theory or M-Theory contemplate a smaller 
and more fundamental particle beneath them. 
However, the basic and fundamental, 
indivisible thing of quantum is not size  
or energy of a particle, rather it’s always 
some pair of complementary traits. You will  
probably have heard of Heisenberg’s Uncertainty 
Principle and how we can only know the momentum  
or speed of a particle or what its position 
is, at the same time, with so much certainty. 
Conceptually you might imagine you want to 
measure some object's speed and location, and  
you can only do this as well as your instruments 
allow, say a stopwatch and a ruler each accurate  
to a millisecond and a millimeter. You can only 
get so accurate with those two devices, and if  
you want to do better you need to buy more 
expensive and accurate equipment, but you  
have a limited budget so buying a more accurate 
ruler or stopwatch means having to buy a cheaper  
and less accurate type of the other, giving you 
a maximum accuracy or a minimum uncertainty you  
can reach, with your available equipment.
In the case of the Heisenberg Uncertainty  
Principle, we have a minimum uncertainty 
that the universe budgets us for measuring  
these two paired traits, momentum or speed with 
position. That represents a type of fundamental  
thing or pixel, if you would. There’s an inherent 
uncertainty to any measurement of any particle,  
but not based on one trait like how 
wide it is, or how much energy it has,  
but rather as the product of two traits which 
are conjugate pairs, like momentum and position. 
That minimum value is Planck’s Constant, 
and is in units of energy times frequency,  
or mass times speed times position, and it turns 
out that same value works for a number of other  
paired quantities, like energy versus time, we can 
only know so accurately how much energy something  
has by sacrificing how accurately we can time 
its existence. There are many more, angular  
momentum with orientation, or angular position is 
one. We have magnetic potential with density of  
electric current, and electric potential with 
density of electric charge, or gravitational  
potential with mass density, and more.
But the big one besides momentum and position  
is energy with time, and contemplate for a moment 
that the Universe allows us to have an uncertainty  
of energy at some place, because we can only 
measure it so accurately. We can’t say it is zero,  
even if nothing is there, because there’s that 
uncertain value of energy at any given moment.  
The bigger that amount of energy is, 
the shorter the moment it can last,  
but that packet of energy is a particle.
This shows up in a lot of ways, and one of  
those would be with a cold classic particle. Heat 
and temperature indicate random kinetic movement  
of particles around in some medium or place, and 
we cool things by leaching out that random motion.  
In theory, if you leach it all out, your system 
is at absolute zero, which is -273 Celsius or -460  
Fahrenheit, and the Kelvin and Rankine system 
are the Celsius and Fahrenheit scale where we  
set 0 as absolute zero. So today as I write this 
episode, back in July of 2023, it is 88 Fahrenheit  
or 548 Rankine, here in the US, and in Celsius 
or centigrade, that’s 31 Celsius or 304 Kelvin. 
Absolute zero has some weird hypothetical 
properties, like possessing no entropy,  
but you can’t actually get there because of 
the Uncertainty Principle. If your particle  
was totally without momentum, we couldn’t tell 
where it was in terms of position, or vice-versa. 
The key thing about the uncertainty principle 
is to understand its real haziness of location.  
For instance, if I have a prisoner in transit 
and the prison transport breaks and he escapes,  
we can estimate how far he might have traveled 
on foot by knowing how long it’s been since the  
crash and how fast he might be able to walk. 
And he might be anywhere inside that circle  
centered on the crash and with a radius equal to 
his maximum speed multiplied by the time since the  
escape. His position is hazy and uncertain, until 
we find him, but he’s classical so the uncertainty  
was only to us, he had a real and specific course 
he followed and was never at any of those other  
spots in the circle. In quantum, until we measure 
something, it truly was in all those other places,  
less a specific object and place than a fog 
or haze across it all till it actually pushed  
into a more certain state. And again, that 
isn’t just position and momentum, but any of  
those conjugate pairs like energy and time.
That’s the really weird part about quantum,  
adjusting to the notion that the uncertainty was 
real, a fundamental minimum of the universe, not  
our limitations as observers doing measurements. 
Some folks think of it like a pixel, I tend to  
refer to it as a minimum accounting limitation, 
like how we don’t have fractions of a penny. 
If you’ve seen the film Office Space, which is 
a bit of a cult classic, you might remember that  
their get rich quick method came from stealing 
all the half-cents or fractions that were done  
in billions of trades. Every transaction, 
whether it was for a dollar and 2.3 cents,  
or a million dollars and 7 and a half cents, 
had one of the parties getting that whole cent  
and the other not, and they were grabbing that 
for themselves. Keep that notion in mind because  
in a lot of ways that’s the notion behind 
harnessing energy from quantum uncertainty. 
But zero-point energy derives its name 
from absolute zero, and the idea that even  
perfectly frozen atoms or molecules retain some 
vibration and thus energy, and we extend that  
out to all sorts of other phenomena, who 
have fluctuating fields of some sort and  
energy that would exist inherently in them, from 
quantum, and call this zero-point. And it doesn’t  
even have to involve any normal particles, 
which is where vacuum energy comes from. 
Even in the emptiest seeming bit of space far from 
any planet or star or even galaxy, there’s still  
traffic moving through there. Think of an empty 
rural town with a major highway going through it;  
its population might only be a hundred folks, 
but several thousand people drive through every  
day and are a fractional resident, as it were, 
living there for five minutes, and so every 288  
people driving through in a day makes for one 
more all-day resident. Even in the emptiest bit  
of space with just a gas particle or hydrogen 
atom per cubic meter, there are still billions  
of photons and neutrinos pouring through there at 
any moment. It’s not a real vacuum as a result. 
But it goes beyond this, because space has a lot 
of what we call virtual or temporary particles  
popping in and out of existence. And these are 
very important because they are what you and I are  
mostly made of. You’ve probably heard that each 
of your protons or neutrons in each of the atomic  
nuclei in your body are made up of three quarks 
but if you’ve ever looked at the mass of those  
quarks and the mass of a proton or neutron, you’ll 
notice there’s something off in the accounting.  
We generally measure particle mass in a unit 
called the Mega Electron Volt, or MeV for short,  
as opposed to kilograms or pounds, but an electron 
masses about half a MeV, whereas an up quark  
measures about 2.3 MeV and a down Quark about 
4.8 MeV, about five and ten times more massive  
than an electron respectively.. Protons are two 
up quarks and one down quark, neutrons are two  
down quarks and one up, so you expect the neutron 
to weigh a couple MeV more and that is the case. 
Except you expect they weigh something like 
10 MeV from that, and in reality a proton is  
938.3 MeV and the neutron is 940.6 MeV. Around 
100 times more massive than we were expecting. 
Where is that mass? And what allows 
these things to shift their form,  
or interact with each other to divide, or 
combine or change into other materials?  
We discussed this more in our Antimatter 
Factories Episode, but the short form is  
that we have both valence quarks, which are those 
three known quarks, and a lot of gluons and a sea  
of virtual particles, including virtual quarks.
You might recognize valence quarks from chemistry,  
where we have the valence electrons, the 
ones in the outermost shell of an atom that  
actually bond and interact with other atoms to 
form molecules, and about the only part of an  
atom seen and interacted with in the higher, 
chemical layer of reality. Think of those 3  
valence quarks in that regard, they’re the more 
stable bit of a particle like a proton or neutron  
that has any meaningful stability in that next 
higher layer of reality. You might also think of  
them as an iceberg floating on a larger sea of 
water, not really permanent but more of a real  
object than any random volume of that water. 
That water is still very much there and real,  
and pushing all those icebergs around, but 
other than some rippling waves, we don’t  
really see it much from above. But we might 
see one of those waves, especially if a large  
iceberg chunk or rock fell in to make a ripple, 
but it’s kind of debatable if that’s an object. 
Virtual particles are like that, and in general 
they pop up in opposite pairs and annihilate,  
and they often have properties that would not 
normally exist in a stable form. Just as an  
example, it might be that particles could only 
have an energy state between 1 and 1 billion eV,  
and we found that they almost always lasted 
for only the barest fraction of an instant  
as such a packet, but that for some reason 
those at 511,000 eV lasted quite a while,  
and those at 2.3 million and 4.8 million did too, 
and also at 95 million and 1.275 billion – those  
being the masses of the electron and its positron 
antimatter twin, and the masses of the up,  
down, strange, and charm quarks – along 
with their respective antimatter twins. 
We don’t know why, though there probably is 
a reason, and it might be something along the  
lines of why very few numbers are prime numbers 
or perfect squares, and fewer at bigger numbers.  
Things we think of as constant and immutable 
at that higher atomic layer of reality,  
beneath the chemical but above the subatomic 
particle realm, like having a positive mass,  
are no longer guaranteed, and you might 
have a pair of particles that had positive  
and negative mass, rather than positive and 
negative charge. Incidentally we discussed  
more about pair annihilation and apparent time 
travel in our recent episode Retrocausality, and  
will mostly bypass that for the sake of brevity 
today since this episode is long enough already. 
Such things are always popping in and out 
of existence, everywhere in the universe,  
all of the time. They exist for a moment 
then annihilate again, and indeed the virtual  
particle pair is arguably more of a concept 
we use for describing it than a true reality,  
like the planetary model of atoms, handy and 
decent for describing a concept with no clear  
analogy to our layer of reality, and again we 
discuss that more in Retrocausality. You could  
just as easily think of it as a quick ripple 
of wave on that sea, with a given height and  
frequency, and next to it a drop in height, a 
negative valley between waves, though not an  
absence of water in a true negative sense, just 
a local negative, with a kilometer of sea below. 
Our reality, from the atomic and above, 
floats on that sea, called the Dirac Sea,  
and might bob and dip a bit, a few feet here or 
there, but the ocean below is kilometers deep, and  
not in any way a vacuum absent of mass or energy.
Our knowledge beyond this gets increasingly murky,  
like staring down into an ocean, but we assume 
somewhere deep below is the true bottom,  
the true vacuum, and as you might guess, 
our interest in accessing this false  
vacuum – the ocean of space as it were – 
for energy and resources is quite high. 
Key notion though, empty space contains energy, 
simply by existing, much as a volume of ocean  
contains water. It may contain all sorts 
of other things and energy, but that basic  
existence even when emptied of others still 
represents energy, and vast amounts of it. 
Folks wonder why black holes can lose mass over 
time, since nothing can escape, and they will  
hear that they can evaporate by losing virtual 
particles. It will then seem strange to hear this  
happens at their event horizon and the bigger that 
horizon, or the bigger the black hole, the slower  
this goes. And the reason is because that black 
hole isn’t the source of those virtual particles,  
regular old space is. There’s no greater amount 
of virtual particle pair production at an event  
horizon’s surface. But tiny ones have very sharp 
changes in gravity compared to big ones, if one  
of the particles in the pair is even a nanometer 
closer to the black hole than its twin, it will  
experience vastly higher gravity pulling on it.
And what that means is that if two particles pop  
up, one on each side of that event horizon, one 
can fall back in – this is the one with negative  
mass for reasons we’ll skip today but have 
discussed in other episodes. The negative mass  
one is pulled down while its positive mass twin 
escapes, they do not recombine and annihilate,  
and the black hole loses a little mass. Most 
of the time, even there, this does not happen;  
they’re close enough together to annihilate even 
with one of them experiencing a stronger yank down  
than the other. But the sharper that difference 
– the tidal difference of gravity – the more  
likely this is to occur. When one of those 
particles doesn’t annihilate with the other,  
they stick around and become real, so to speak.
Real and virtual are pretty vague terms here,  
and again, these are more usefully thought of 
as thinking aids for visualization than anything  
else, so you have to be careful stretching 
analogies here. But this is one of our first ways  
we could get energy out of the vacuum of space, 
and that’s by letting it get ripped out of black  
holes. Stephen Hawking is famous for many reasons, 
but his work on Black Hole evaporation is what he  
originally became well known for in physics 
circles, long before the general public had  
heard of him, and we call this radiation coming 
off them Hawking Radiation as a result. Small ones  
emit more and die quicker, and one the mere size 
of a proton is giving off a gigawatt of power,  
by our equations, which have the radius of 
black holes change linearly with their mass  
and their lifetime going inverse cube of that. 
And such a gigawatt powered proton-sized micro  
black hole would still mass an incredible 560 
megatons and still live 480 billion years,  
35 times the current age of the universe.
Let me put a caveat on there though, and a couple  
more of them. First, we have no experimental proof 
of this, which is why Hawking didn’t have a Nobel  
Prize, and second, it’s where we start running 
into those Quantum Gravity issues we talk about  
where Einsteinian Relativity runs into Quantum 
Mechanics and doesn’t seem to agree or match well. 
So, we don’t know how deep that sea is 
or how dense matter can truly get – we’re  
not so sure black holes really are point-like 
singularities at their cores, but at a certain  
point the amount of energy radiating out of one 
in any given instant might rise so high that it  
peaked out because you couldn’t get any more 
virtual pairs popping out of that ever-smaller  
volume to keep up. The well runs dry, or at 
least the water can only come out so fast. 
How deep that well is represents another big 
problem, because general relativity and quantum  
disagree, and by many, many orders of magnitude, 
with the 2015 measurements being about 55 orders  
of magnitude smaller than the theoretical vacuum 
energy density. 55 orders of magnitude, to give  
some scale, is more than the difference between 
a proton’s radius, and the radius of the entire  
Observable Universe… so a bit of a disagreement 
there and definitely not as accurate as we would  
like. If you want to describe something’s size 
and say it’s somewhere between smaller than a  
proton and bigger than the Universe, plus or minus 
a few more orders of magnitude, people might tend  
to wonder if you know what you’re talking about.
But what we are talking about is the density of  
that vacuum energy. Currently, the low end figure 
is somewhere around 3 or 4 hydrogen atoms worth of  
mass energy per cubic meter, and the higher end 
is a billion times denser than a neutron star. 
And this is the depth of our ocean, or Dirac Sea. 
It is somewhere between a shallow lake not much  
deeper than the gentlest ripples on it, to one 
so deep that even a tsunami is barely noticeable  
against its endless depth. And it makes a 
big difference which one of these is right,  
or if it’s somewhere in between, 
for ideas of tapping vacuum energy. 
Now, in sci-fi terms, vacuum energy and zero point 
energy are pretty interchangeable, and again, in  
science terms, vacuum energy is a subcategory of 
zero point energy, and if we consider the ZPM or  
Zed-PM, the Zero Point Modules of Stargate SG-1, 
we get a description that sounds specifically like  
vacuum energy. It is fictional of course, and 
we hear it described as a pocket of subspace  
that’s been crammed into the ZPM – which is a 
cylinder the size of a large thermos – and can  
be carried around, but provides untold gigawatts 
of power for centuries or even thousands of years. 
That tends to imply the device has more energy 
in it than its mass-energy would indicate,  
though it’s hard to say, a 10 kilogram cylinder 
slowly draining itself of mass energy could  
provide 2.5 gigawatts of power for 10,000 years, 
similar to the largest power plants and dams,  
and in that TV show we see the island city 
of Atlantis submerged for 10,000 years,  
running on minimum energy, protected by its energy 
shields, and that’s how long it had to run in  
order for it to drain three of those ZPMs dry. 
So maybe the modules only have mass energy, like  
antimatter or a micro-black hole have. That might 
be in there by stuffing it with condensed pockets  
of spacetime, but don’t assume a big, condensed 
pocket of spacetime doesn’t have mass. It has  
energy, you don’t have to carry it around with 
you and it doesn’t have any real drag effect as  
you fly through it, kinda, but that doesn’t mean 
that if you jam a cubic light year of spacetime  
into some module that it wouldn’t have mass.
That sci-fi franchise has wormholes though,  
so maybe it’s connecting to a micro 
universe or pocket dimension they made,  
and that connection, or universe, is slowly 
destabilizing, or draining, and that module  
is just the hardware needed on your side. 
It’s the power outlet not the power plant. 
Generating power by harvesting spacetime, which 
seems to regularly spring from nothing as the  
Universe expands anyway, wouldn’t seem to require 
carrying it around, though you might need some  
sort of pressure difference, much like a lukewarm 
bathtub has tons of energy but you can’t generate  
power from that tub unless you have some lower 
temperature or pressure region to drain it into.  
That might be where you need some sort of pocket 
universe, as opposed to just crunching down local  
spacetime; which, as mentioned a moment ago, 
might be anywhere from needing a cubic kilometer  
of vacuum to generate one joule of energy, to 
needing the volume of the typical water bottle  
to generate the energy output of a supernova. 
Which is even more ridiculous than the already  
huge amount of mass energy a bottle of water has, 
exceeding the typical multi megaton hydrogen bomb. 
We can’t tap that bottle of water for power 
very easily though and the same would seem  
to apply to the vacuum. Let’s get to tapping 
that energy, and we’ll begin with the Casimir  
Effect. Which we should start by saying is an 
effect we’ve done in the lab plenty of times,  
as I know a lot of this stuff sounds very 
sci-fi and can make you wonder how glued in  
it is to real experimental data and results.
In the Casimir effect, we notice that two  
very flat plates, kept within a very short 
distance of each other but not quite touching,  
will have a force or pressure pushing them 
together. This will happen even in a vacuum  
chamber. This certainly seemed mysterious but 
in the virtual particle context, we need only  
remember that these particles have a wavelength 
based on their energy, the more energy a particle  
has in it, the lower its wavelength and higher its 
frequency. A particle with a very long wavelength  
cannot form between two plates that are closer 
to each other than that wavelength. It’s too big  
to cram into that spot, while ironically 
smaller but more energy dense ones can. 
If you start with those two big plates very 
far apart – though no further apart than they  
themselves are wide – you will notice a 
little force pushing them together, but  
only a little. And that’s because those very wide 
wavelength particles are still forming outside of  
it and bumping into the backside of either plate 
occasionally to give a small shove, but there’s no  
shove of that wavelength or higher from inside, 
no perfect balance, and thus a net push inward.  
As they get closer, more and more wavelengths are 
getting excluded from forming between them until  
eventually almost none can. The pressure outside 
is normal for a vacuum, but somehow the pressure  
inside is less than zero, and now we know this is 
from that false vacuum, the space outside isn’t  
really empty, and the space inside those plates 
is just emptier. This is measurable in a lab, the  
Casimir Effect, and is one of the ways zero point 
energy and vacuum energy first got identified. 
Whenever you hear folks talking about negative 
pressure or negative energy levels being observed,  
this is usually the situation being referred 
to, and again it’s negative like -1 Celsius is,  
as opposed -1 Kelvin, or how being one 
foot under water is -1 foot, when that  
ocean is miles deep and the planetary core 4000 
more miles below. It’s not less than nothing,  
it’s less than the local normal.
Nonetheless, while it is less than  
the local norm, it might be sufficient for 
some of the suggested use of negative energy  
or pressure, like holding open the mouth of a 
traversable wormhole, or running a warp drive. 
Now, this isn’t a lot of power being produced, 
arguably none. This isn’t likely to ever  
practically produce power with known material, too 
much friction issues for a very weak force. If you  
have access to something like magmatter, which 
would allow flat plates fine enough to be flat  
and separate way below the conventional atomic 
scale, this might work. For anyone wanting to  
run calculations, the idealized force goes with 
the inverse fourth power of distance between the  
plates. So, make your plates 10 times closer, and 
the force gets 10 to the 4th power or 10,000 times  
stronger. The force is the pressure times area, 
so it grows linearly with the area of the plates. 
We usually say you need those plates to be 
within about 10 nanometers to get a negative  
one atmosphere of pressure between them, and we 
might imagine a pair of graphene sheets that could  
achieve a mere one nanometer separation, 
and have 10,000 atmospheres of negative  
pressure. That’s a hundred times the pressure 
difference inside the piston of a race car,  
so you can imagine devices at this scale being 
able to produce serious and usable levels of  
energy, if you can find a way to tap it, but 
I’m handwaving a lot there about managing to  
get improbably large plates improbably close to 
each other and doing it some fashion that you can  
generate net useful energy from and quickly. This 
could also make for very tiny power generators,  
those smaller than biological cells and yet much 
more powerful, the ideal nanobot power source. 
More likely, you would be looking at far 
lower pressures and far larger surface areas,  
like kilometer wide arrays of panels 
operating at the low nanometer scale in  
some very vibration-proofed ultra-cold vacuum lab 
in deep space. And assuming you can even generate  
power this way at all – this is hotly debated 
– it’s the sort of thing you would use for  
some extragalactic post-biological civilization 
running on computronium, far from another power  
supply and with access to all the space they want.
Let’s move on to some other vacuum and zero-point  
energy options. Though let me note first that 
this isn’t necessarily limited to power production  
either; the particles you potentially can rip 
out of the void itself don’t have to always be  
photons. They might be more mundane particles 
of matter, or exotic ones. And I should note  
that quarks never exist by themselves, they 
always have a gluon connection to at least one  
more quark or if you pull a pair of quarks apart, 
the force needed to rip them free from each other  
is exactly the energy needed to create another 
pair of quarks, so that you now have two pairs  
of quarks. You broke them apart by applying enough 
energy to pay for the mass for those two new ones. 
So, let’s talk about the infinite hotel 
paradox next. Also known as Hilbert’s hotel,  
for the famous mathematician David Hilbert who 
discussed the idea 100 years ago in 1924. In it,  
we assume a hotel with a countable infinite 
number of rooms, and each one is occupied. We  
just said every room is full, so infinite rooms 
or not, it can accommodate no more guests. But  
infinity is weird, no matter how big a number you 
count to, there is always a bigger one, so if it  
has infinite rooms there should always be an empty 
one, and there never is a last room either. So the  
manager should be able to find you a room as you 
enter by having each occupant move one room over,  
room 10 goes to room 11, who goes to 12 and 
room one trillion goes to one-trillion-and one,  
etc. You go into room 1. By this same 
reasoning, if the hotel starts having  
guests exit, each leaving by moving first 
to the room one number lower than them,  
then an infinite number of people can exit.
This is our mathematical justification for  
how we could potentially pull infinite 
particles or energy out of vacuum energy,  
and stuff them back in too, as the Dirac Sea is 
assumed to be infinite. And in this case, can I  
pull electrons right out of the vacuum and back 
in again, but generate current whilst I do it? 
Stepping a bit into more hypothetical physics, 
we have a class of particles known as fermions,  
named for the same Enrico Fermi as in the 
Fermi Paradox, and along with bosons they  
make up all the particles and matter we 
know of. Bosons, which include photons,  
are mostly noteworthy for being allowed to be in 
the same place as other bosons, which is handy  
since an extreme low frequency, high wavelength 
photon might be the size of a planet while  
containing a billion-trillion times less energy in 
it than an electron – which is a type of fermion.  
Fermions are particles that can’t be in the exact 
same place as other fermions, or specifically the  
same quantum state. Normally a fermion has 
an antiparticle, much as the positron is the  
antiparticle of the electron, and we call any of 
these Dirac Fermions, and all the standard model  
fermions except neutrinos are Dirac Fermions. 
But we also have a hypothetical particle called  
a Majorana Fermion that is its own antiparticle, 
and it’s debated if the neutrino is one of these. 
Majorana Fermions come up a lot in superconductor 
discussions though, as you might have noticed  
with the recent discussion of LK-99, and 
particularly in the MZM or Majorana Zero model,  
and there’s also some question on if they 
might violate conservation of energy.  
There is research indicating that the number of 
these types of fermions that exist matters. For  
instance, if just one type of these fermions 
exist, when moving through a boundary,  
it could disappear into nothingness. That’s 
interesting if one wants to get rid of energy,  
but not so useful for energy generation. Then 
again, math is unforgiving and unempathic, and  
if in some situations, it would allow for energy 
to be lost, then so too one can imagine energy  
could be gained. Producing these fermions out 
of nothing, at the boundaries between different  
materials doesn’t sound too interesting, but 
we need to keep in mind that if one can produce  
matter, we can produce or keep alive black holes, 
which could be used for direct energy extraction. 
There’s a lot of aspects of Quantum that seem to 
leave the door open to violating conservation of  
energy, or allowing power production that might 
seem to be a perpetual motion machine or draw  
power from outside our conventional physical 
universe. These generally would count as either  
vacuum energy or more broadly zero point energy.
Recently, the discovery of the gravitational wave  
background makes relativity also a slightly 
better candidate for energy extraction out of  
the void. Like waves on an ocean, that through 
their mechanical action are able to generate  
useful work, we might find ways to tap into this 
universe-wide ocean of gravity waves. One possible  
way to get energy from gravitational waves would 
be using resonant mass devices. These are devices  
made to resonate at specific frequencies. 
If gravitational waves passed through them,  
they’d start moving, or amplify the movement 
they already have. Tune them just right to the  
frequencies of the void, and we could get 
devices that move in an orderly fashion,  
that we could use for creating electricity, 
or for their mechanical energy directly. 
Indeed, if we could get ourselves to move 
at higher speeds, then the frequency of  
the gravitational wave background would increase, 
same as blue shifting cosmic microwave background  
radiation, since like on an ocean, waves would 
hit you more often if you were in a boat traveling  
faster on the ocean. We could then get more energy 
out of these waves, with the only possible initial  
cost of accelerating at high speeds. If moving 
really fast, we’d also be able to extract energy  
from the other kind of background action - 
the cosmic microwave background radiation,  
or CMB, which again would itself become more 
energetic from our perspective, though of  
course, it can also have a drag effect too.
Channel regulars will know I’m not a big fan  
of String Theory, but it is one of, if not the 
strongest theory we’ve got for exploring beyond  
the Standard Model, and along with M-Theory, 
both allow options for sparking of new big  
bangs or brane collisions, or poking holes in 
the false vacuum to generate power through,  
and we’ve already discussed how some of 
those options might work. We also have other  
non-vacuum-specific options for zero point energy 
that might arise out of modified gravity theories,  
meant to explain either why gravity is so 
weak compared to other forces, or maybe  
is falling off in strength faster than we think 
and eliminating the need for dark matter or dark  
energy. Dark energy also seems to offer a way of 
violating energy conservation at the grand scale. 
It’s interesting to imagine some infinite power 
supply, possibly a very weak one requiring lots  
of space to get a useful output, as it can have 
some effects on civilizations we might not expect,  
and let’s close with some of these.
First, we might imagine a big vacuum energy  
power generator helping run a spaceship, 
but we also might imagine one that was  
simply using weakly interacting particles like 
neutrinos or dark matter, ripped from the void,  
as its propellant. Such an engine is safe to 
use around planets and inhabited megastructures,  
unlike another conventional engine spewing 
out vast amounts of highly interacting and  
highly energized particles that would often 
make a rocket plume seem weak in comparison. 
Second, while it obviously violates conservation 
of energy, that’s not really a problem under  
Einsteinian Relativity anyway, though one 
can argue if all that new energy contained  
in new bits of spacetime created by dark energy 
counts as a violation, or local violation anyway,  
and so too, this would seem to violate entropy, 
but we should keep in mind the Big Bang did too,  
and while we say ‘violates’, it is not like 
there’s any apparent police force out there  
holding up the law. But it might be something 
more akin to vacuum energy having real limits  
on how much energy you can pull out of a given 
volume, in which case our conventional notion  
of Dyson spheres and Kardashev 2 civilizations 
might be wrong and maybe every alien civilization  
is very spread out, and favors extragalactic 
space, where it’s bigger and cooler. They just  
grab what they need for the trip, leaving the 
galaxy fairly untouched overall, and head out,  
somewhat akin to the Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis 
of the Fermi Paradox we’ll discuss next month. 
This is a dubious caveat on the Fermi Paradox, 
because unless this vacuum energy is miraculously  
generated in some way that removes its waste heat 
signature, we should expect to still see that huge  
infrared source representing someone using a lot 
of it, but if it needed to be small and diffuse  
enough, it could easily be so widespread and 
minimal that we’re not really detecting it yet.  
Not invisible, just too hard for us to yet see 
it distinctly from background noise and other  
ambient radiation, especially as it might be very 
close to Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation in  
frequency. It might be a bit hard to guess that 
frequency too, as those folks leaving the galaxy  
to use it might be moving at a variety of high 
speeds, especially once they've been traveling  
long enough that hubble expansion is speeding them 
up and red shifting them from our perspective. 
Of course, to end with a note of warning and 
promise, a Pandora’s Box, it might be that the  
only really useful way to generate power from 
the vacuum is to puncture that false vacuum,  
and we tend to think that might send a ripple 
of spreading annihilation out at light speed  
from the puncture, replacing it with true 
vacuum, or a new universe. It may be that  
the answer to Fermi’s Paradox is that people 
learn how to use vacuum energy very early on,  
but they do it by making a new big bang in a 
pocket universe, which they can tap for power,  
like those ZPMs are implied to be from earlier. 
Maybe we exist inside one of those, or maybe the  
reason we don’t see any alien civilizations is 
that every time one comes up, they wreck their  
region of the Universe they’re in, or create a 
new one. Maybe we’re just waiting till such a  
wave of destruction reaches us, unless we blow 
a hole open ourselves first, or maybe we’re  
just the next in a long line of civilizations 
that blew themselves out of existence to make  
way for a new Universe built on their ashes.
Metaphorically anyway; after all, what it’s  
really built on is this infinite sea of vacuum, of 
nothingness, and if you can make matter or energy  
from nothing, well that sounds like the sort of 
power a god has, and it might turn out that you  
need to be in that tier of skill to successfully 
wield the living void that spawns realities. 
Either way, vacuum energy is definitely a 
place worth investigating, but where wise  
men might fear to tread, since it's very easy 
to fall when you’re walking on nothing at all…. 
Contemplating the fundamental underpinnings of our 
universe, like Vacuum Energy, does tend to lead  
naturally to thinking about the beginning of time 
and where we came from. That still remains an area  
of speculation but we can look further back every 
year, and what we see is a Dark Age in between the  
early Universe and the first stars arising. A 
period in which many critical properties of the  
Universe were very different, possibly allowing 
unusual types of stars to form, and I thought  
we would explore that topic in another Nebula 
Original, Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time,  
which is out now on Nebula, our streaming service.
On Nebula, you not only get to see every regular  
episode of SFIA a few days early and ad 
free, but all our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, 
and more Nebula Original episodes like,  
Life As An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on 
the Moon, Space Freighters, Retrocausality,  
Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal Cyclic 
Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content from an 
ever-growing community of creators. Using  
my link and discount it’s available now for just 
over $2.50 a month, less than the price of the  
drink or snack you might have been enjoying during 
the episode, and it goes to supporting new content  
from myself and other creators.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my code, 
isaacarthur, you not only get access to all of the  
great stuff Nebula offers, you’ll also be directly 
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early,  
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus 
content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur 
I wanted to give a quick thanks to fellow 
physicist Vlad Ardelean from the Infinite  
Energy Initiative for helping to write this 
episode. He and I had been chatting about that  
project just as I was getting ready to draft this 
script, and he volunteered to help and included  
some ideas for zero point energy production, 
and it was perfect timing. Vlad founded the  
Infinite Energy Initiative to explore more way-out 
ideas on energy production like vacuum energy,  
and to bridge the gap between science and sci-fi. 
If you’re interested in seeing how they plan to  
push science beyond its currently-accepted 
boundaries, looking for new sources of energy  
like the ones discussed, or would like to get 
involved, check them out infiniteenergy.org 
So next week we have two episodes exploring the 
fabrication of the future. Starting next Thursday  
with a look at spaceship factories. Then it will 
be time for Sci Fi Sunday, on October 15th, where  
we’ll contemplate entire planets turned into giant 
factories, in Forgeworlds & Industrial Planets.  
Then we’ll ask the big question of if Life 
Extension Is Ethical on October 19th. Then  
we will look at another type of dedicated 
planet, Fortress Worlds, on October 26th,  
and wrap things up on Sunday, October 
29th, with our monthly Livestream Q&A. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show on Patreon, and if  
you want to donate and help in other ways, you 
can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
