This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Dark Matter is the most mysterious substance
in the Universe, and also what most of it
seems to be made of, and yet it may be the
keystone of building future civilizations.
Dark Matter… we don’t even know what the
heck the stuff is, so it might seem hard to
discuss technologies that make use of it.
At the same time, we do know a few things
about it with great certainty, and a few more
with some confidence, and one of those is
that Dark Matter makes up the vast majority
of everything in this Universe. Given that
it does make up most of everything, finding
ways to use it is likely to be on every civilization’s
wish list of technological advancements, and
that’s our main focus for today, how civilizations
would use this hyper abundant material if
they could, and in what ways they might.
For a type of matter that is apparently so
common, it is rather irritating that we know
so little about it, and we should probably
start by talking about what we do know about
it.
First, it almost certainly exists. That irritates
a lot of folks and often raises many objections,
some are reasonable objections, but some of
those aren’t terribly valid. As an example,
we’ve never seen any dark matter directly,
and that seems a good objection, until one
remembers that we’ve never seen most of
Earth directly, including its mantle and core,
and never hesitate to discuss its interior,
nor the interior of our sun or any other star.
We also don’t “See” subatomic particles,
they’re smaller than light waves and we
detect them mostly by blowing stuff up and
looking at the pattern of the wreckage to
see what could have caused it, so to speak.
So there are a lot of legitimate objections
to dark matter and we’ll discuss some of
them, and discussed more of them a few years
back in our Dark Matter episode, but the ones
hinging on us not being able to directly detect
it aren’t good ones. Most particles we first
detected were detected by indirect means,
like picking up gamma rays to prove the mass
of the electron and positron, after a pair
of them had collided and emitted those gamma
rays. Generally we’ve measured the mass
of other atoms and their interiors by seeing
how much other charged particles were deflected
by the protons in their core when passing
by them.
Nor is the time argument a good one. Folks
say we’ve been looking for it for a couple
decades now and still haven’t found it,
but that’s not true. We haven’t been looking
for dark matter unsuccessfully for a couple
decades, we’ve been looking for dark matter
unsuccessfully for over a century.
We have all sorts of particles we hypothesized
decades before we proved they existed… and
considerably more we hypothesized and haven’t
found yet or even ruled out. Dark Matter has
been bugging us a lot longer, since before
we even knew what a galaxy was, what subatomic
particles were, what 2 of the 4 fundamental
physical forces were, or how those particles
interacted with those forces or didn’t.
Way back in 1884 Lord Kelvin estimated that
there had to be a lot more mass we couldn’t
see than we could see to explain the velocities
of stars orbiting the milky way. He didn’t
assume any type of exotic matter at the time,
just mundane matter not in stars, and that
was the general notion for a long time. We
just assumed it was various things which were
normal but dark, like interstellar dust or
planets, or later even stellar remnants. Indeed
that was one suspected culprit back in Kelvin’s
day because we assumed stars gave light off
from being formed very hot and slowly cooling,
as we had no clue that nuclear fusion took
place inside stars. Problem was, we did find
a lot of this mundane dark matter, and it
never even came close to adding up.
In modern times, we know that virtually every
galaxy we can see has a lot more mass than
the stars we see in it can account for. But
how do we know that? The calculation uses
the fact that for an object in a roughly circular
orbit, the centrifugal force on it is equal
to the gravitational force it’s subjected
to by the body it's orbiting. So if we determine
the distance to the galaxy of interest, we
can use it’s angular size in our field of
view to determine its radius. If we observe
it over time, we can measure the speed of
the objects orbiting at the galaxy’s edges.
From the orbital radius and velocity, we calculate
the centrifugal force, which is equal to the
gravity exerted on it, which tells us the
mass of the galaxy. But when we use the starlight
from a galaxy to determine the numbers and
types of the stars in it and add up the masses
of those types, we consistently find that
the luminous mass of most galaxies is only
about 1/10 of their gravitational mass.
We can see the speeds of stars on the outer
edges orbiting them and we can see how much
they pull on neighboring galaxies, and every
alternative answer for it not being gravity
didn’t work out. Tons were tried.
Well then we had to ask ourselves what generates
gravity. In point of fact it isn't actually
mass, any type of energy generates gravity,
but mass is one type of energy, under Einstein’s
E=mc², and all the other types of energy
except light speed objects like photons are
associated with mass. For instance you can
have an awfully lot of kinetic energy on an
object with mass, but for it to come anywhere
near paralleling the amount of energy tied
up in the mass itself, it needs to be moving
at relativistic speeds. Galaxies are hugely
massive affairs but even they can’t contain
objects moving at those speeds for long, so
your only two remaining options are rotational
energy of certain very dense objects, like
black holes, neutron stars, and white dwarfs,
or the random kinetic energy of particles
in very hot objects, again like neutrons stars
and black holes. Only a tiny fraction of stars
end up as neutron stars and black holes, and
all known stars combined won’t add up to
the missing mass, so it's not these stellar
remnants, there just aren’t enough of them.
But it also means that missing energy generating
all that gravity in galaxies has to be mass
energy.
Probably, we can’t rule out some other type
of energy storage besides the known 5, which
are mass, kinetic, potential, thermal, and
radiant energy. Dark Energy does not fit the
bill incidentally, that appears to be evenly
spread throughout the Universe whereas this
missing mass we call dark matter clumps in
galaxies. This is also why we often say it
has to be cold, which in physics terms and
context means the individual particles or
objects of dark matter can’t be moving very
fast or they would exceed a galaxy’s escape
velocity and not clump into galaxies, this
overall motion is random and thus can be thought
of as heat energy or temperature.
Galaxies tend to have escape velocities on
the order of of hundreds of kilometers per
second, so ‘Cold’ is a rather dubious
term here, something with the velocity sufficient
to escape a galaxy and the mass of a proton
or neutron still has a temperature comparable
to the inside of a star, in the sense of random
kinetic energy being heat energy. That’s
nothing compared to relativistic hot temperatures
though, and is a bit problematic considering
we always assume everything in the early Universe
was ultra hot and cooled down by radiation
and collision. Dark Matter doesn’t emit
photons as heat radiation, and do not collide
with anything, even other bits of dark matter,
or do so very infrequently.
Which is the other thing, what is a collision?
Down at the atomic scale the whole concept
of physically rigid objects is out of play,
it just doesn’t mean anything. Collisions
occur using those fundamental physical forces.
Not every known particle interacts with all
of those either. Electrons, and their big
brothers the muon and Tau particles, along
with their anti-particles, are what we call
leptons, and they don’t even notice the
strong nuclear force that binds quarks together
to make things like protons and neutrons.
We have 4 fundamental forces, quarks, and
thus things made from them, interact with
all of 4, though many of those constructs,
like the electrically neutral neutron don’t
interact much with one of those. In the same
way, neutrinos don’t interact with the strong
nuclear or electromagnetic force, just gravity,
which everything seems to, and the weak nuclear
force, and the latter so weakly that a neutrino
could pass through a light year of lead and
likely make the trip uninterrupted. Our best
neutrino detection methods manage to nab the
occasional one interacting with matter, while
countless trillions will have passed through
that same spot first.
Neutrinos move at near light speed, within
the tiniest fraction of a hairsbreadth of
light speed, and have only a smidgen of mass,
less than a millionth of what an electron
has or a billionth of what a proton or neutron
has, and a neutrino-antineutrino rest annihilation
would produce an infrared photon, not the
millions or billions of times more powerful
gamma ray photons those other particle produce
when annihilating with their antimatter opposites.
They carry far more energy though, and it's
almost all kinetic energy.
Neutrinos are not our focus for today, they
are not dark matter though have been a popular
suggestion in the past, but if you could make
a thin foil able to absorb or reflect neutrinos,
you’d have a rather awesome solar sail,
and if you could make the equivalent of a
Laser, a neutrino beam, that would be a great
way to shove spaceships around, since it would
mean a super powerful beam only handy for
ship propulsion, not a giant doomsday beam
like laser propulsion platforms would be if
used for militant intent.
The most popular suggested particle for dark
matter these days is most easily thought of
as something like a heavy neutrino. Neutrinos
move at near light speed because they are
created in events that typically kick out
an electron and proton, or their antiparticles,
at fairly high speeds, and the neutrino gets
the same kick, but having vastly less mass,
exits the event at a vastly higher speed.
Imagine instead that such a particle had the
mass of proton or neutron or maybe even more,
we do have some elementary particles more
massive than them, 3 of the 6 quark types,
charm, top, and bottom quarks out mass protons
and neutrons, the top quark by a factor of
a couple hundred, as does the electron’s
big brother the Tau particle, and two of our
4 gauge bosons, the W and Z Bosons – the
other two types of gauge bosons are the photon
and the gluon, gauge bosons are what transmit
the fundamental forces and the W and Z Boson
being supermassive is why the Weak Force,
which they transmit, is so weak, which is
to say, so short range, they decay so rapidly
they barely have time to carry the force anywhere.
The Higgs Boson also outmasses protons and
neutrons, and by more than a hundredfold.
So of the current 17 elementary particles
in the Standard Model, of which neutrinos
are 3 incidentally, 7 of them are more massive
than protons and neutrons, which are not elementary
particles, and between the most massive, the
top quark, and the least massive, the neutrinos,
there is a mass difference of around a trillion.
Keeping all that in mind, the idea that there’s
a particle as weakly interacting as a neutrino
but more massive than a proton or neutron
doesn’t seem that far fetched. These Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles, called WIMPs,
are probably the most popular category of
candidate for dark matter and will be our
primary focus for technologies to discuss
today. But they don’t have a lock on the
title for dark matter constituents, and not
all of them require some new elementary particle.
Many of these don’t even require some unknown
type or quantity of matter, like MACHOs, or
Massive Compact Halo Objects, such as black
holes or brown dwarfs, and we have extensively
discussed how valuable black hole technologies
can be in other episodes, though MACHOs are
not viewed as a good dark matter candidate
at this time. However mundane solutions other
than new types of particles can still represent
valuable knowledge for new technologies. Remember,
one way or another something generates an
effect that causes either a great deal more
gravity than all the known mundane matter
around, or alters a fundamental force like
gravity or electromagnetism to operate other
than inverse square at big enough distances.
If such variations exist, they can probably
be exploited for technology, such as reversing
them so gravity was stronger at nearer distances,
for instance.
One example is MOND, Modified Newtonian Dynamics,
which was suggested in the earlier 1980s as
a dark matter solution by proposing that gravity
only acted as an inverse square force – weakening
with the square of distance – out to a certain
distance, beyond which it got much weaker.
That doesn’t necessarily require magic either,
force carrying particles can decay over distances,
that’s exactly why the weak force is so
weak, the W and Z Bosons decay before covering
even atomic distances, let alone astronomical
ones, so if the graviton had a half-life of
a billion years, gravity a billion years travel
away would be half as strong as suspected.
There’s an issue with that, a graviton would
have to have some rest mass, particles with
no mass experience no time and thus can’t
have a half life, and gravity moves at light
speed which no particle with mass can do,
but gravity is hard to detect and the neutrino
has a tiny amount of mass and moves within
a fraction of light speed, as the theory suggests,
so could a graviton, potentially being less
massive and faster than even a neutrino. MOND
had quite a following and had a fair few variations,
but fell out of favor with the detection of
the Bullet Cluster in 2006, a pair of colliding
clusters of galaxies about 4 billion light
years away. We’ll skip discussing why today,
especially as there are some rebuttals in
spite of many folks saying the bullet cluster
shot MOND dead. See the episode on Dark Matter
for more of the suggested types too.
I mention it because if you found out that
gravitons had a rest mass and could decay,
for instance, that might start implying ways
to generate gravitons without lots of mass
or reflect or bounce them around, make a gravity
laser, or GRASER, things like that. We are
very limited in discussing technologies relying
on matter, or forces, we don’t understand,
but this is what we can discuss today.
Some are easy, if Dark Matter is any sort
of particle that has mass, but doesn’t interact
much, then if you can find something it does
interact with, you can scoop it up and use
it as a cheap source of mass. It would be
useless as a building material, but becomes
great not just for making gravity on artificial
planets, freeing up not just valuable heavy
elements but even hydrogen and helium for
other uses, it also lets you do strange stuff,
like create a big ball of dark matter with
a deep gravity well, and yet so weakly interacting
you could fly right through it.
As an example, what happens if you dump around
a stellar mass of dark matter into an existing
star? None of that dark matter is getting
blown away by that or sinking into the core,
it just floats around generating gravity and
minding its own business. The gravity it creates
though would not, and would squeeze that star
down even more, speeding up fusion. It is
potentially handy as a fuel source too, dark
matter should have all the energy per unit
of mass anything else does, so if you stuff
it down a black hole it would work as a starship
fuel, see our black hole starships episode
for discussion of how we can use black holes
for ships and power.
So we do have at least one known way to manipulate
dark matter. It does react with gravity, and
while it would be very hard to get into a
black hole, once over the event horizon it
is as stuck in there as anything else. It’s
hard to get in because black holes are small,
so the only way matter ever ends up in one
is if by some freak chance it happens to run
into the event horizon straight on. Normal
matter can be sucked into an orbit of a black
hole and as more of it accumulates, the bits
orbiting the black hole can start bumping
into each other, getting hot and falling in
– this is the accretion disc. Dark Matter
doesn’t do that. If it gets into orbit around
something, it will just keep orbiting, not
clumping together. This is why dark matter
in galaxies forms a roughly spherical shape
while the matter in galaxies tends to form
more of a disc.
But dark matter can be absorbed by a black
hole. And we estimate there’s a bit more
than a proton’s mass of dark matter per
cubic meter of intra-galactic space. Now a
3-solar mass black hole, which is generally
about as small as can naturally form, will
have a cubic volume inside its event horizon
of about 3 trillion cubic meters, and would
have absorbed all that dark matter locally
present, but that’s only going to be about
4 picograms of mass, and even the big monster
at our core, with a million times more mass
and a billion, billion times more volume,
would only have swallowed about 4 tons of
dark matter.
Of course the stuff is moving, not static,
so it would be more than that. Let’s assume
we shot a black hole with a square kilometer
of cross section through a galaxy on a 100
thousand light year path, or 10^21 meters,
or slicing a column through a galaxy of 10^27
cubic meters. We’d still have only swept
up a couple kilograms of dark matter. You
can throw on more sail, so to speak, by having
a cross section tens of thousands of kilometers
across or even larger, one 10,000 kilometers
across will sweep up dozens of trillions of
tons of matter. Or deflect it or capture it
for later use if we’re talking about a material
that absorbs dark matter instead of a black
hole, or an artificial event horizon. Collecting
dark matter is not likely to be an easy task,
but if you can do it, then it represents a
vastly bigger supply of matter and energy
than all our mundane sources combined.
It’s also quite possible there are dark
matter only interactions, such as dark matter
antimatter annihilation, or dark matter fusion,
that might only be possible when you squeeze
the stuff in rather tightly. If you had two
such beams, one dark matter and one anti-dark
matter, when and where they collided might
be a very energetic event. That might also
be a terrifying weapon since dark matter would
be hard to detect or deflect. And that’s
assuming it doesn’t have other strange properties,
many proposed dark matter candidates interact
strongly with space, time, other matter, or
other forces.
As a reminder certain scenarios for dark matter
would imply the ability to play with gravity
more than we’d currently expect, and things
like flat event horizons or gravitational
scoops might be on the horizon at that point.
Imagine for the moment we had some bit of
Clarketech that let us stretch a black hole
into a disc, like it was some balloon we could
squish flatter. Now that implies the ability
to manipulate gravity so it didn’t radiate
omnidirectionally, but let's say we could,
either flattening the gravity out into a disc
or squishing it into a pair of polar jets.
See our anti-gravity episode for more discussion
of gravity-based technologies, but such manipulation
might let you have a spaceship that could
suck in matter, even dark matter, as it flew
by. That’s also a potentially potent weapon
and shield too, though it should be noted
that any time two event horizons touch they
will merge to an external viewer.
A black hole event horizon has a radius proportional
to its mass, and a cross-section proportional
to the square of mass, so you can make really
enormous black holes and get dark matter that
way and presumably an awful lot of dark matter
will get absorbed in the post-stellar era
of the Universe as you start having all other
matter get sucked into black holes all orbiting
each other and perturbing everything else
orbiting, including dark matter, till it combines
together or gets ejected into the extra-galactic
void.
Of course that scenario would tend to imply
you didn’t have little bits of physical
dark matter lying around in favor of something
like MOND, but it's also possible the solution
to dark matter will turn out to be two different
effects. Which is to say we have problems
pinning down what dark matter is because our
predictions keep missing, and they might do
so because its two overlapping and unrelated
effects that amplify a given net effect we’re
seeing, as in we do have WIMPS and we do have
decaying gravity, but fewer and less of them.
You would need to have someway to manipulate
the stuff, but if you do it is very useful
– probably with valuable properties we don’t
even know about, you might be able to make
unique materials out of it, but in space where
things are quite empty, it's nice to have
something to push against but only when you
want to. Neutrinos and neutrino-like particles,
weakly interacting particles, if you have
something that can interact with them more
strongly, it lets you use them – potentially
selectively – to interact when you want.
When flying through space I want to interact
with nothing, except for when I do, like for
slowing down or turning, so we often contemplate
unfurling reflective solar sails or magnetic
fields to interact with solar wind. Ones able
to work with neutrinos or neutrino—like
types of dark matter would be useful for the
same reason. Dark matter is not dense, but
with a big enough sail you’ll hit some,
and the momentum exchange is going to be based
on your speed.
Also if these are particles, it may be possible
to build something out of them if we understand
them better, on the flip side, the ability
to mimic this weak interaction or non-interaction
can be handy. We often see force fields in
science fiction as a means of defense, but
the other popular method tends to be turning
invisible or ethereal, so you either couldn’t
be seen or things went right through you.
In practice that has to be both, since folks
can only see you if light bounces off you,
which means a laser beam would bounce off
you too, or more importantly would vaporize
you. If I can see you I can interact with
you and if I can interact with you, I can
hurt you, or use you to hurt someone else.
But if you can make yourself unable to interact
or be interacted with, that’s a very good
defense, and if you could make your ship or
space station have that weakly interacting
property temporarily, or even build out of
dark matter, that’s a very good method of
both stealth and defense.
As an example of weaponizing WIMP-style Dark
Matter, you could probably put a cloud of
it around someone’s planet as a way of keeping
them earth-bound, positioning it either to
raise the surface gravity, or to make a cloud
in circular orbit over the planet, so the
surface gravity stayed the same but the escape
velocity was arbitrarily high. You could wrap
that planet so thick in dark matter that time
slowed down on it and only relativistic spaceships
could leave it, a good way to quarantine a
worrisome species you didn’t want out in
the galaxy but didn’t want to interfere
with or destroy - a situation reminiscent
of the people of Cricket from Douglas Adams’
novel Life, the Universe, and Everything.
So we’ve talked about spaceships and power,
and again it’s a great power source simply
as raw material we can feed into a black hole
that is abundant and not useful for other
things, assuming of course we can find a way
to gather it. However, same as we discuss
filling shell worlds up with hydrogen or black
holes to generate gravity, dark matter offers
that same route. We don’t know much about
it, but we know it doesn’t interact much,
even with itself, so we should be able to
cram the stuff together quite tightly without
the normal pressure issues. We normally say
if you want gravity on something small, without
using spin-gravity, you need micro-black holes,
but ultra-dense dark matter might be an option
too, squeezing tons of it into a volume the
size of a pinhead. It's going to act very
differently than normal matter in a lot of
counterintuitive ways.
For instance if you had a solid block of the
stuff cooled down to ice cube temperatures
and threw it into a pot of boiling water,
it would not heat up. Partially because it
would fall right through the pot, but if that
pot were lined with whatever your hand was
covered in to toss it in, then the ice cube
of dark matter could sit in that boiling water
for eons and pick up no heat from the water.
It would also bounce up and down on the bottom
of the pot over and over again, unaffected
by the water. Same dark matter could fall
through the pot, and the Earth, and fall through
the center and right back up again, then down
again, over and over. If you’ve got something
you can sheath it in, that it does bounce
off of, then you could be making ultra-dense
and heavy objects, which is very handy for
certain more abstract megastructures where
you want gravity lower or higher in certain
places.
Unsurprisingly its use as a source of cheap
mass appeals to me for worldbuilding, and
that might bias me towards the WIMP version
of dark matter, but other versions would have
their uses too. Some dark matter options include
particles that interact with gravity and some
unknown fifth force, and if that force only
interacts with dark matter we wouldn’t even
see it, except in its tendency to draw dark
matter together but not very much. This has
some problems, for instance it can’t be
too strong or, since dark matter does interact
with gravity, that fifth-force interaction
should allow more clumping and result in giant
black holes all over the place.
We also tend to assume dark matter, if a particle,
would have an antiparticle, and when it annihilates
it obviously doesn’t produce photons as
most commonly happens in matter-antimatter
annihilation, as we would notice that. Unless
it does so at the 1.9 millimeter range, that
of Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation,
which is unlikely and would really mess with
our current cosmological models. But it might
annihilate into some other form of energy
too, for instance dark energy, which causes
bits of new space to emerge all over the place.
I often make a point of telling folks that
in spite of the similar name, and extreme
abundance, dark matter and dark energy don’t
have anything to do with each other. That
we know of anyway, and there are a few dark
matter theories that do tie it to dark energy,
such as GIMPs, Gravitationally-Interacting
Massive Particles, which some folks feel fit
better with the Vacuum Solutions to Einstein’s
equations for gravity, the basic notion being
bits of dark matter were singularities of
dark energy.
As I mentioned earlier, its not mass that
generates gravity, its energy, and mass is
just the easiest dense form of it, and so
you can make a black hole or singularity out
of any very dense clump of energy, cram enough
photons in one place fast enough and you’ll
get a little black hole. So presumably cram
enough dark energy in one place and you get
a singularity too. Though given that dark
energy’s only known property is its association
with expanding space I’d wonder how you
would cram it together. But it might be crammed
together initially, and decays, as we expect
small black holes to do, and causes space
to emerge when it does.
Primordial black holes is another popular
dark matter option. The early universe was
super-dense and black hole formation without
a supernova implosion, or even bits of energy
that never expanded in the first place, are
certainly plausible options. One issue with
that is that we think black holes decay, and
the smaller the faster, that’s Stephen Hawking’s
original famous contribution to physics. It
is only a theory, there is no experimental
proof of black hole evaporation. Assuming
that is right, then a primordial black hole
could not mass less than 10^11 kilograms,
100 megatons, or they would have evaporated
by now. Now this means none of them could
be, or we would see the radiation of their
evaporation all over the place. We don’t
know that primordial black hole mass would
be evenly distributed, with some massing a
ton, some 100 tons, and some 100 billion,
and all points in between, but we do know
it can’t be evenly distributed at masses
below 100 megatons unless our concept of black
hole evaporation is wrong. Otherwise we would
see radiation being emitted corresponding
to those black holes evaporations.
There are a number of other issues with primordial
black holes as dark matter and the option,
like MOND, is less popular these days, but
if true it would make for a great technology,
see our black hole episodes for why. But there’s
some more problems there too. First, if black
holes do not evaporate, then they become eternal
traps for matter, though we can still generate
power with them by dumping matter into them,
though it is hard to put matter into a micro-black
hole.
However they should be able to absorb matter
rapidly inside something like a neutron star,
and were that the case the larger ones, in
excess of a trillion tons, would be able to
capture mass in a neutron star and ought to
cause detonations of them that we’re not
seeing. Indeed all things included, it's really
only black holes in the 10 to 500 gigaton
range that would have a decent chance of not
leaving various other telltales of their existence
we’re not detecting, and we don’t know
any reason why primordial black holes would
have formed in that mass range but not in
others. Of course we don’t know why all
the various subatomic particles come as specific
masses either, like 511 kilo-electronvolts
for the electron, so primordial black holes
might do so for the same reason.
Assuming they did though, and were our dark
matter candidate, they would potentially be
very handy. The ones on the higher end could
be force-fed matter to make them bigger, but
the smaller ones, at 10 gigatons, would give
off about 3.6 megawatts of power, and do it
for quadrillions of years, while those on
the higher end, 500 gigatons, would give off
1400 watts, and for even longer, nearly a
billion-trillion years. Because of their sheer
mass they don’t make for good starship drives,
but would be created for stationary places
and indeed you’d probably just build around
such medium sized primordial black holes as
you found them. We would also hopefully be
seeing them in the future by getting better
at detecting the background radiation they
would be giving off universe wide and isolating
it from other known sources, like the CMB.
Fundamentally though the real power of Dark
Matter probably won’t be for power generation,
that’s just something that seems a probable
use based on what little we know. As a last
example, one of the candidates for dark matter
is that it isn’t crunched down mass or even
energy but crushed down dimensions, and both
additional space dimension and additional
time dimensions, and if that were true and
became something we could work with, opens
up all sorts of scenarios like storing time,
manipulating time, and maybe even twisting
or ripping space-time.
Fundamentally the more we learn about Dark
Matter, the more we can explore what we might
do with it, but I hope from today it becomes
clear why wanting to find out what dark matter’s
properties are is about more than just answering
a big question about what the Universe is
made of, it's about recognizing that anything
that abundant is useful simply in its abundance,
and that its sheer mysterious nature implies
properties we might be able to use for goals
as mysterious and massive as dark matter is
itself.
One of the things we were discussing today
was how even though we cannot see Dark Matter
directly, we can still know it’s there in
much the same way we know what the inside
of atoms or our planet or our Sun looks like.
It reminded me of a topic in a similar vein
folks often raise, and that’s if mathematics
is a real thing or something humanity made
up, is math invented or discovered, and my
friend Jade from Up and Atom, who were previously
teamed up with to discuss Boltzmann Brains
& Anthropic Principle, recently released a
Nebula Original addressing if Math was invented
or discovered.
She is one of a number of science and education
creators we teamed up with to form Nebula,
our Streamy-Award Nominated streaming service,
a little over a year back and its exploded
since its inception, allowing us to invite
in more creators and get a bit more ambitious
with original content, like our Coexistence
with Aliens series. It’s also where you
can watch episodes of SFIA a couple days early
and ad free.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula by itself
but our friends over at Curiositystream, which
is home to thousands of top notch science
and education videos, have teamed up with
us to offer Nebula’s content along with
their own, if you sign up at the link in the
episode description. That means you will not
only get Curiosity Stream, and get to see
their excellent shows like Space Phenomena’s
episode on Black Holes, but can also catch
SFIA episodes early and without ads, and help
support our show while you’re doing it,
as well as see amazing exclusive content from
our sibling shows.
Again you can get a year of both Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15, get to support
the show and see our episodes early, and get
all that for less than $15 by using the link
in the episode’s description.
I also wanted to thank everyone who's been
supporting Nebula, and for those watching
the episode there, I was just expounding on
some of the improvements we’re making and
planning and how much fun it is to get to
interact with so many other creators. I’ve
heard some horror stories of working with
various artists or actors over the years,
who were monstrously egotistic or hard to
work with, so I’m always pleasantly surprised
by how fun and down-to-earth just about everyone
I’ve met has been, from the smaller shows
all the way up to the giants ten times our
own show’s size or more. 2020 was a hard
year for a lot of folks and some creators
did end up tossing in the towel, especially
those with newer channels still in growth
phase. I know in some cases it was from funding
drops, so while I’m thanking the folks supporting
us on Nebula, let me also thank all our Patreon
subscribers who stuck with us through the
crisis, and the recent re-shuffle on that
platform, this channel literally would not
exist without you, nor would countless other
shows.
So this weekend we have another SFIA Scifi
Sunday episode, where we will be examining
the notion of alien cohabitation, and we will
discuss both the structures meant to support
multiple alien ecosystems and the relationships
we often see in science fiction, of aliens
and humans marrying and having hybrid kids,
on Sunday, February 14th, Valentine’s Day.
Then next week we’ll be looking at Orbital
Bombardment, as we return to our Space Warfare
series, before closing the month out with
an episode on Colonizing Giant Stars in two
weeks and our Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday,
February 28th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas. You can also follow
us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our
audio-only versions of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
