The galaxy is an immense and mysterious place 
we may one day explore and settle, but for now,  
we have only one planet, and the galaxy holds 
many dangers, so what can we do to defend Earth?
One of the more fascinating things about 
the Moon is all the craters[a] on it,  
some of which are the size of continents, but when 
pondering those it does raise the worrisome issue  
that Earth has probably been hit just as hard and 
often and probably by rocks even bigger than the  
one we tend to say got the dinosaurs. Indeed, the 
Moon’s very existence is thought to be due to some  
small planet hitting proto-Earth and spewing 
out a debris cloud from which the Moon formed. 
Needless to say, that’s not a survivable 
strike, and indeed if we detected anything  
like that coming our way right now, or an alien 
armada or any of a number of other potential  
astronomic catastrophes, our best strategy would 
be to drop to our knees and pray. Should divine  
intercession not be forthcoming, it leaves you in 
an excellent position to kiss your butt goodbye. 
There’s essentially no defense strategy available 
to us if we haven’t got at least months to prepare  
right now, and against an alien armada or a 
full-scale planet careening our way that wouldn’t  
be enough time either, outside of a Hollywood 
movie. Indeed there’s not much you could do  
without centuries of advancement and forewarning 
in those two cases, which you might actually have,  
and we’ll get to them later, but at the moment 
even something a kilometer across would be  
something we’d need a large lead up time to 
deploy against and deflect enough to not hit us. 
Thankfully, there are two important caveats 
here even for those very large asteroids or  
alien invasion fleets. First, such catastrophic 
astronomical natural events are rare enough that  
the odds of one getting us this next century 
or so are pretty minimal, and lower the more  
severe the incident. We’ll talk about the odds of 
asteroids by size and destructive capacity later  
but for things well below the dinosaur-killing 
scale, if we can detect it a couple days out,  
even now we could mitigate damage, in the sense 
human casualties, by calculating the strike  
location and evacuating that area and bringing in 
personnel and resources to handle the aftermath.  
I doubt you could get everyone out of a major 
metropolis in that time but you might be able to  
get most and from smaller cities, probably nearly 
everyone, plus it is unlikely to impact on one. 
Second, we do have defensive strategies 
we can prepare with time and resources,  
and those work best on the ones more likely to 
occur, like a mile-wide asteroid heading our way  
rather than something like an ejected black hole 
headed through our inner solar system. And even  
against such an overwhelming threat, we do have 
options, even if we might need some centuries  
to be developed enough in space to manage them. 
We also do know where most 1-mile wide asteroids  
near Earth are and none are plausible to hit 
in the next century, so that mostly limits it  
to deep space or interstellar asteroids.
We are going to look through a number of  
threats today in increasing order of concern and 
dwelling on those earlier and milder threats like  
asteroids, rogue spacecraft, orbital bombardments, 
solar flares and coronal mass ejections,  
but we’ll move onto look at extreme scenarios 
including supernovae and gamma ray burst defense,  
the asteroid being an entire planet instead, 
an ejected black hole passing nearby,  
a von Neumann Swarm of alien or earthly origin, 
or perhaps launched from an interstellar colony  
of ours that lost control of an experiment, or 
deployed relativistic kill missiles our way,  
or even a Nicoll-Dyson Beam, before contemplating 
what we do if an alien armada really does show up. 
The key defense against the milder scenarios 
though is the successful development of cislunar  
space so you can get resources and equipment in 
play, and so that you have a detection system  
that can give you the earliest warning. This is 
why Defending Earth is one of the four pillars of  
the National Space Society along with last week's 
topic of Clean Energy from Space, and those two  
along with Developing Space and Communities in 
space were up on one of our audience image polls  
back in November and won, you voted for them, 
and now we’re giving them each their own episode. 
You’re probably not creating vast power or 
detection grids, or defenses to protect Earth,  
without developing space and creating those 
communities up in orbit and connected to  
support from down here on the ground. Which 
is why they are so important to the NSS,  
and for folks new to the show wondering who this 
guy with the weird voice is, I am Isaac Arthur,  
host of this show, Science & Futurism, for 
almost 10 years now, and president of the  
National Space Society for just over a year now.
I’m a theoretical physicist by training and a  
veteran of the US Army, and I’ve also had the 
honor of guest lecturing at the US Air Force  
Academy and consulting for the Space Force back 
when it was just starting. You have to rattle off  
the qualifications occasionally so folks assume 
there’s a chance you know what you’re talking  
about rather than spouting crazy nonsense, though 
as some folks often note, sanity is an optional  
trait for scientists and futurists anyway.
And like a lot of you probably also have, I’ve  
spent a lot of time reading & watching science 
fiction and pondering the threats presented  
in those and saying “Well if they’d just done X 
instead…” or “Hey, that’s not how physics works!” 
I’ve consulted on a lot of science fiction 
over the years, usually where the author or  
game developer wants to see if something is very 
realistic, and while I always encourage that,  
it comes attached with the advice that you should 
never let reality get in the way of a good story.  
I’m very fortunate to have a lot of friends 
and colleagues who’ve also spent a lot of time  
seriously thinking and writing on these topics 
that I can draw from. Also, I tend to take the  
reverse approach of what I recommend to sci-fi 
authors by trying to figure out how to deal with  
over the top projects and threats, I figure out 
what we want to do and then to see if reality  
permits it, even if only by extreme measures that 
seem unbelievable to us now. Otherwise you can get  
lost in conventional wisdom and stuff everybody 
knows, or everybody knows isn’t possible. 
And that’s a good place to segue into Asteroids, 
because every so often I’ll hear someone saying  
you wouldn’t want to blow one up with a 
big nuke or that wouldn’t work. And the  
answer is implied by one of our show’s favorite 
mottos, “If Brute Force isn’t working, you just  
aren’t using enough of it”, which was also the 
unofficial motto of my old artillery regiment. 
Nukes are a great solution to a lot of problems, 
in accordance with the first Rule of Warfare,  
that there is no such thing as overkill,[b][c] 
but they often are not going to be your easiest  
or best approach. You can’t just launch an ICBM 
up into space, they don’t carry enough fuel to  
get into orbit let alone away from Earth. Nor 
can we just slap an ICBM into a big rocket,  
get it into orbit then launch it from there at 
an asteroid. Now the Department of Energy is  
responsible for our nuclear stockpile and I’m 
glad to say they take planetary defense quite  
seriously, but our detection window is still small 
and our ability to respond is very limited. We  
need a lot more development up there to pull off 
the delivery of a nuke to a large asteroid far  
enough away to matter, and that same development 
does offer some other solutions. On the plus side,  
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory did some 
modeling on nukes against asteroids recently and  
was pretty optimistic about their potential too.
I want to talk about some of the other approaches  
we’ll use on an asteroid, but I also want 
to ask about what sort of infrastructure,  
capabilities, and development we need to pull 
these off. Last week we spent a lot of time  
talking about power satellites and beaming 
technology, for instance, to provide Earth  
with clean energy, and such platforms offer 
us a couple ways to engage asteroids too. 
Now asteroids are going to be unlike 
many of our other threats in that they  
tend to be pretty visible and give 
you a lot of reaction time, compared  
to a Relativistic Kill Missile for instance, 
which might be moving 10,000 times as fast,  
and perhaps a hundred-millionth the size of an 
asteroid carrying the same damage potential.  
Meaning it needs to be 10,000 times closer 
before you’d see it with the same detector and,  
since it is moving ten thousand times faster, will 
give you a hundred-millionth of the reaction time. 
Asteroids also won’t generally be moving in 
a straight line toward us, they’ll be on some  
elliptical orbital path of their own that happens 
to intercept us and we may get decades of advance  
notice by spotting and calculating that in 
a few more of its orbital cycles it’s going  
to cross our path too closely. It is generally 
not hurtling in from deep space and if it were,  
it would probably have a nice ice shell that began 
giving it a comet tail we could spot more easily. 
Instead your default asteroid is from the 
various Near Earth Objects or asteroids,  
of which there’s many thousands, and after that 
one of the many millions hanging around in the  
asteroid belt or the various loose families of 
asteroids elsewhere in the system. Lots of those  
are the broken remnants of bigger asteroids that 
collided with something in the past. And often  
some collision like that is what pushes them into 
an orbit that’s going to eventually hit a planet,  
since otherwise their mass has been orbiting 
the Sun just fine for billions of years  
and hundreds of millions of orbital cycles.
Of these, the specific characteristics of the  
asteroid matter, as a metallic one, is different 
than one more composed of silicon or carbon,  
or ices for that matter. But I would say anything 
over ten meters across has a non-zero chance of  
damaging something here on Earth, very non-zero 
if it is made out of nickel or iron and is bigger,  
and even things as small as a millimeter across 
can damage some spacecraft, station, or satellite  
in space. So your detection goal is to begin 
by detecting anything threatening Earth, and  
the bigger the threat the bigger the asteroid, and 
easier it is to spot, and gradually you get better  
at spotting and managing them till you are able 
to protect even against small ones that threaten  
only your orbital infrastructure, not your planet.
By examining craters here, and on the Moon where  
they are easier to see, as well as the 
composition of the asteroid belt, we know  
about how often bigger ones come, statistically 
anyway. And frequency is essentially inverse with  
mass or inverse with the cube of diameter, as 
mass rises with the cube of diameter. So, ten  
times the diameter, one thousand times the mass 
and destructive potential, and we would expect  
them to show up about a thousandth as often.
We estimate an asteroid one kilometer across  
tends to hit Earth a couple times per million-year 
period. Such an asteroid carries more kinetic  
energy in it than all the nuclear weapons 
we’ve ever built combined but is arguably a  
smaller threat than them since we can target those 
strategically to hit cities while an asteroid or  
volcano – which is in a similar energy scale – are 
statistically unlikely to come down on any city,  
let alone break up to hit each one of them. 
As such it could certainly wreak havoc on  
civilization but not in a civilization-ending 
way, and it is something that has occurred  
repeatedly while humans have existed, 
depending on where we want to place that  
cutoff in either what qualifies as human or 
how big the asteroid needs to be to qualify. 
But I should note that even one just 10 meters 
across is typically carrying as much energy as  
our earliest nuclear bombs and we typically get 
one of these once a decade. These are as going  
to airburst, which makes them leave multiple 
small craters if any, as opposed to a big one,  
and that further reduces their threat as 
the atmosphere is soaking up most of their  
energy. We would generally expect anything 
much under 40 meters across not to leave  
a single crater, even one made of iron.
This is one reason breaking an asteroid  
into pieces right before it hits us can be 
a good thing, though it can also result in a  
shotgun blast style effect and one very likely 
to set off a Kessler Syndrome Event in orbit,  
damaging or even ruining our orbital 
infrastructure in the process. Which  
is why it's better to get them sooner.
Right now, if we had maybe a month’s warning,  
we could potentially get some nukes up into 
higher orbit and on an orbital path that  
would take them near the asteroid as it came 
by to be hit by some of that nuclear explosion,  
maybe even a close proximity strike would break 
it apart. Whether or not you want to break an  
asteroid apart, especially that close, is very 
debatable. So is where you should detonate a  
nuke for maximum effect, though I think the 
strongest argument is for a short distance  
from it to spread the blast over its surface, 
similar to when we contemplate using a nuke on  
the pusher plate of an Orion drive spacecraft.
Where, how, and when are tricky topics though,  
more modeling and experience is needed, 
and depends on a lot of factors specific  
to the asteroid and intercept scenario. 
We discussed the specifics more in our  
Asteroid Defense episode some years back. 
But ultimately, the bigger our warning time,  
the better we can handle the problem.
That capacity to ensure a warning like that  
has slowly been growing and is nearly upon us, 
and largely because of AI, which can scan a big  
cluster of data – such as telescope and radar data 
– for something tiny like the sunlight or radar  
scatter off a rock a hundred million miles away, 
pick it up a handful of times in a short interval,  
and automatically calculate its trajectory 
to see if it’s in a threatening window,  
then forward those on to people at a big telescope 
they can aim at it. Or a big gun for that matter. 
And that helps but honestly such a rock still has 
a high probability of landing somewhere virtually  
uninhabited, and 70% chance of hitting the ocean, 
and just doesn’t carry enough energy to cause a  
sweeping tsunami along a coastline. Over a certain 
mass range it’s gonna hurt pretty much no matter  
where it lands, but most asteroids are smaller. In 
sci-fi we always encounter one big enough to wreck  
a city or big enough to wreck a continent, and the 
former are a million times more frequent and have  
way less than a one percent chance of landing 
near any city, let alone a major metropolis. 
If you actually knew where the rock was going 
to land and it wasn't catastrophically big,  
then in most cases you would rather let 
it come in than have its blasted remains  
whacking through your orbital infrastructure. 
Unless it’s hitting something heavily populated  
you just evacuate all your people, pets, 
and precious objects from the blast radius  
and rebuild afterward. But the smaller that 
asteroid, the harder it’s going to be to see  
it and get a precise vector a long time out, and 
the more likely it is to have fragmentation during  
atmospheric entry significantly alters its course.
Does that mean we should ignore this threat? No,  
though on the scale of thousands of years it’s 
really more of a threat to our developed orbital  
space than a reason to develop that orbital 
space to protect Earth from asteroids. Also a  
nice economic boon too, because an asteroid is 
valuable raw materials entering Earth orbital  
space rather than one we have to mine from 
a hundred million miles away. So your real  
aim is to capture it into a nice stable 
orbit and without too much fragmentation. 
Aside from Nukes, there’s a few other mature 
ideas on deflecting asteroids. You can Impact  
it with something, which we tried with 
the Double Asteroid Redirection Test,  
or DART, a couple years back, and this might be 
a series of collisions with multiple spacecraft  
or projectiles. There’s also the idea you could 
paint the object, either dark or light, so that  
it reflected or absorbed sunlight which might 
push it off course as it absorbs that momentum. 
But the method I tend to prefer is to just focus 
an energy beam on the rock or iceball to ablate  
or vaporize some material off the rock as 
a rocket stream that pushes it off course,  
and that will do, but I’d imagine in the more long 
term you would expect a spacecraft to go to one,  
place a microwave receiver and engine on it, 
and let an incoming energy beam power a more  
controlled thrust that efficiently and predictably 
brings the rock into a new orbit of your choosing  
with little loss or fragmentation.
That’s the sort of exercise a good  
asteroid mining company will probably excel at 
and which I would expect us to have a modestly  
robust supply of within a century or two, thus 
I don’t really worry much about asteroids as  
a threat to Earth. Fist-sized rocks in orbit, 
which are very common, are more of concern and  
only grow more so as we develop more things 
in space, especially large cross-section  
satellites like solar power satellites. See 
our recent episode on clearing space debris  
for more discussion of managing those though.
As mentioned, another option is to ram one with  
a high-speed and high-mass spacecraft, though 
that’s likely to produce a lot of debris, as we  
discovered with DART about two years back. Also, 
that high speed ramming craft option actually  
represents a bigger threat to us than those 
asteroids and requires a better detection system.  
A Rogue Spaceship moving at interplanetary speeds 
isn’t all that high-energy compared to an asteroid  
of the same size, it might be moving faster and 
carrying an order of magnitude more kinetic energy  
per kilogram, but it is also mostly hollow. As 
such it is easier to detect, pound-for-pound,  
so-to-speak. Unfortunately, it can also be aiming 
itself rather precisely, letting it hit any given  
space station or space habitat, and it might have 
atmospheric re-entry protection so as to allow it  
to come through intact to hit a major metropolis 
right in downtown. It can also unpredictably  
change course. So it might only have the energy of 
a rock 10 meters across but that’s still a small  
nuclear bomb, and one presumably any person with 
access to a shuttle-sized spacecraft could hijack. 
This means you need monitoring and active defense 
measures in place for handling such scenarios and  
that conveniently handles your smaller and more 
frequent asteroids too, as they’re easier to spot,  
slower, and easier to target with longer 
to work with. A bit like aircraft,  
scale is the biggest factor in damage so you 
can escalate your security measures with scale  
in mind. This is also where regulation matters 
earlier-on, as until we have enough assets in  
space to make such monitoring both necessary and 
possible, we can mostly relax in the confidence of  
knowing that current spacecraft would need the 
assistance of flight control to calculate such  
a suicide run so as to hit their desired target.
When you’re moving several kilometers per second  
you can’t really be placing yourself in 
wherever you please using your mark-one  
eyeball. But as computers and AI get better 
and more compact, and spacecraft more common,  
one Loonie with some skill or a terrorist cell 
with some coordination might be able to pull this  
off. Or they might be a spacecraft owned by some 
rogue state that’s going to have an ‘accident’. 
The good news is that for detection purposes 
we don’t need more advanced science here,  
we just need more telescopes and detectors 
aimed at space or up in space, and better AI  
and algorithms for helping on it. And this will 
come organically in our continuing development  
of both astronomical and defense assets.
At some point we’ll probably need a formal grid  
up there. Things like the Space Fence system but 
scaled up, and that’s going to be a non-trivial  
defense budget item and is more ideal for 
something like the emerging Space Force as opposed  
to NASA and its cousin agencies around the world. 
I would also tend to assume the US wouldn’t be the  
only folks working on that, but while we might 
see NATO or allied nations developing one used  
together, I would not expect global participation 
on that, and exactly because the bigger threat is  
manmade objects which a rogue agency might deploy.
Of course a nation state might be the secret  
backers of such a rogue agency, but they also 
might consider full scale orbital bombardment  
this way rather than some singular strike, 
and in a case like this the full-escalation  
scenario probably involves seeking to cripple 
the detection grid and orbital defense grid  
first. This escalation is likely to come with 
some advanced warning. Generally speaking,  
wars rarely start without advanced warning. When 
they do, they tend to either start small, or start  
barely coordinated, or both. There’s a lot of 
logistics involved in a major operation like that  
and trying to keep any whiff of it from getting 
out in advance tends to be nigh-impossible,  
and comes with a tradeoff between a decent chance 
of secrecy at the cost of lots of unprepared or  
underprepared errors. Need to know operations 
tend not to scale well and start forgetting  
to include important folks in the planning. 
You show up for the invasion and half your  
troops are missing or half asleep and logistics 
wasn’t told to move spare fuel into the area. 
You are also not likely to have all your orbital 
detection and defense system in orbit themselves,  
with a lot inside nicely shielded groundside 
bunkers, and anybody who starts enthusiastically  
blowing orbital infrastructure up is doing 
so with the full knowledge that it is an  
open declaration of war on everybody else with 
assets up there, since all that space debris is  
likely to damage things indiscriminately. See our 
orbital bombardment episode for more on the types  
of weapons those can entail, both near-term 
and higher tech, as well as the groundside  
defense strategies you can employ, which can 
also entail mobile and stealthy submarines  
as opposed to bunkers in the actual ground.
Generally speaking space itself doesn’t allow  
a lot of options for stealth, beyond the 
sheer speed and enormity of things making  
it hard to spot and react to things in time, 
especially as that speed lets them be relatively  
small objects for their damage potential.
Some things also move a lot faster than  
even spacecraft and asteroids. Solar Flares 
& Coronal Mass Ejections thankfully take some  
time to develop where we can spot them, and they 
are pretty visible, but they move fast. Solar  
wind in general moves a couple orders of magnitude 
faster than orbital spacecraft, and while it isn’t  
subtle, you can’t defend against that by blowing 
up the individual particles, since in this case  
they are indeed individual particles at the atomic 
scale, not millimeters to kilometers across. 
This is another example of where prediction 
and early detection are vital, but here we  
have options like placing a big solar deflector at 
our L1 LaGrange point, much as we discuss using to  
help protect a possible future Martian atmosphere 
in our episode on giving Mars a Magnetosphere. We  
discussed these more in our January episodes on 
Statites & Lagites and Lagrange Point Settlement,  
but short form, while Earth's Magnetosphere is 
huge and powerful, deflection in space is just  
as easy to achieve with an early and small push as 
a late and powerful one, much like with asteroids. 
Our L1 Lagrange point is four times further from 
us than our Moon is and is always between us and  
the Sun, and is 200 times further from Earth’s 
center than Earth’s own surface is, let alone  
that big spinning ball of molten metal in 
our core. As such, it needs only give a  
fractionally smaller magnetic nudge to incoming 
ionized particles as they approach from the sun  
to scatter them away from our planet and its 
vulnerable infrastructure on Earth and in orbit. 
Indeed with Lagites we can put it even closer, 
and the sort of huge power collector running a  
massive electromagnet is exactly the sort 
of device that works well as a Statite or  
Lagite. Or perhaps a swarm of such devices at 
a smaller scale but operating in tandem. Nor  
are we contemplating massive objects for this 
purpose, merely large but thin solar collectors  
running fairly simple electromagnets and at power 
levels we already generate here on Earth. This,  
incidentally, would also work against something 
like a shockwave coming off the galactic core,  
though would need to be lined up in that 
direction and keeping things between us and other  
stars is a bit trickier than with our own Sun.
But speaking of giant explosions and other stars,  
while the danger of Supernovae and Gamma Ray 
Bursts to Earth tends to be somewhat exaggerated,  
it is a possibility. A key point today is that we 
are most threatened by other intelligences rather  
than natural catastrophes. We can hardly 
ignore the latter as they’re quite real,  
but we principally need to prepare ourselves 
against man-made, or AI or Alien made attacks,  
not just natural disasters. However the devices 
built to protect against intelligent actors will  
often work for natural disasters too, and often 
more easily. A Supernova scatters an intense blast  
of radiation and high-energy particles in a wide 
omnidirectional blast and thus loses potency with  
distance. And while they are insanely powerful, 
they generally would leave planets behind even in  
their own solar system, especially gas giants.
Nobody living on their surface or in orbit of  
them is surviving of course, even stuff 
living in ultra-deep underwater trenches,  
which would be boiling their way off into space 
with the blast. But planetary distance is on an  
order of ten to a hundred thousand times smaller 
than distance to the neighboring solar system  
and because it falls off inverse square, those 
energies are falling off on an order of hundreds  
of millions to billions of times weaker. Such 
explosions are visible at the moment they strike,  
both moving at or near light-speed, 
so there’s not much immediate warning. 
But there’s no supernova candidates close enough 
to Earth to cause any serious damage to us at the  
moment and such stars are always going to be 
easily naked-eye visible to us if they’re in  
range, so they don’t sneak up on you. Here you 
could employ a large thin metal shield that was  
literally hanging between us and that star and 
was paper thin, and which you would need to use  
some fairly coordinated energy beaming and station 
keeping to remain at that spot or moving window,  
probably way out in a Trans-Neptunian orbit or 
even further. We can’t determine exactly when a  
supernova is going to occur down to a precise 
moment yet but our observations of supernovae  
are mostly after-the-fact so we don’t know 
if there’s very obvious pre-detonation signs. 
At a minimum you should get a few hours advance 
notice if you have decent neutrino detectors and  
then you could have some big guns packed with 
shells full of folded up shielding that could  
fire them in that star direction and which 
could then pop off and expand to form a cloud  
of shielding the supernova particle wave would 
run into. Indeed you might use a whole ton of  
big inflatables full of gas to help absorb the 
energy and re-emit in less harmful frequencies.  
It is an awful lot of energy, even a few dozen 
light years off a Type 1a supernova might whack  
Earth with as much radiation as the Sun gives us 
over many hours and not in benign wavelengths. 
But if some shield or cloud absorbs the energy 
coming toward Earth and is vaporized by it,  
that gas is emitting what it absorbs 
omnidirectionally now and in low energy  
photons. Based on the star or stellar remnant in 
question you will know how much its blast will  
produce and can prepare to put the right amount of 
matter to absorb the blast in between you and it,  
but you could easily have several million 
joules impact per square meter so this is not  
a case where your shield is tissue paper thick 
the way our statites we discuss normally are,  
but you don’t need a planet sized 
slab of metal meters thick either. 
For a type II supernova anyway, that’s a big 
star exploding and you will be expecting that  
event and build such detectors and defenses 
if you have such a star in threat range or  
migrating into threat range or age. Centuries of 
advance notice are implied there at a minimum. 
Type Ia supernovae, which is when a white 
dwarf absorbs enough matter to detonate,  
do not give that specific core collapse warning 
that big stars when fusing and imploding on their  
iron core do. However that amount of mass is 
fairly precise, the Chandrasekhar limit of 1.4  
Solar masses, and we are likely to get even 
more accurate with that, and also unlikely to  
miss any white dwarf in that mass range with 
our modern capabilities, especially as it is  
likely to have a binary partner donating mass. 
Same basic defense applies. Gamma Ray Burst are  
less well understood at this time and also 
directional, so they can be dangerous from  
thousands of light years away, not dozens, and 
this is exactly where more knowledge and better  
observations are vital and the cornerstone 
of defense. Knowing is half the battle,  
or maybe more, and the same sort of defense work.
When it comes to truly large objects like Rogue  
Planets, that knowledge is even more important 
because unlike stars, or even dead stars like  
white dwarfs, they don’t emit much radiation of 
their own for us to detect. Neither do asteroids  
but distance is a big deal here. The amount 
of sunlight bouncing off an object is inverse  
square to its distance, and the amount of light we 
need to see an object by follows this same ratio,  
so an object ten times further from us and the 
Sun is giving off a hundredth the light and only  
a hundredth of that light reaches us, so its ten 
thousand times harder to see. This is why Mercury  
and Mars are visible to our eyes but Pluto 
requires a decent telescope to spot. A rogue  
planet entering our solar system that’s just 
a sixth of light year away, just a few percent  
of the distance to the nearest star, is 10,000 
AU, Astronomical Units, or 10,000 times further  
from the Sun than Earth is and thus getting a 
10-millionth of the sunlight to reflect off itself  
and a 10-millionth of that is what reaches us so 
it’s a not even a trillionth as bright as Mars. 
Correction: 10,000 squared = 100 Million, not 10 million.
and 100 million squared is 10 quadrillion.
Thankfully, it will be emitting light of its 
own, from its own internal heat, and that won’t  
be much and will be in the infrared but will be 
significantly more and is in the spectrum we are  
looking for with infrared exoplanet or rogue 
interstellar planet hunts. If we detected it  
10,000 AU away, even if it was moving at a hundred 
kilometers per second relative to us, we would  
have about 500 years advance warning. Now the 
problem is what you can do with that much warning  
since it doesn’t have to hit us to seriously 
screw up the solar system. Indeed, if it passes  
between the Earth and the Sun, in that volume, the 
damage could be in the form of Earth being heavily  
and fatally perturbed from its orbit. The odds 
of a direct impact are slim but utterly ruinous. 
Can you defend against that?
Yes, yes we could potentially send a  
mission there and with the intent of blowing 
it off course or into a stable orbit in the  
outer solar system where it would pose no threat 
other than possibly perturbing some comets and  
asteroids to migrate in-system, which is a much 
more manageable situation. See our episode Planet  
Ships for a full discussion of how to either move 
a planet so it doesn’t hit us or to make Earth  
able to survive such an ejection into deep space 
itself or even move Earth out of the course of  
direct collision. As always, time is your ally, 
the longer you have to act, the smaller a push  
the incoming rock needs to be deflected, and the 
more time you have to assemble a stronger push. 
This can even work on an Ejected Black Hole 
more massive than our own sun which might  
be making its way out of the galaxy and 
at a few hundred kilometers per second.  
Thankfully black holes are not terribly 
hard to see in spite of their reputation,  
especially one winging through the void perturbing 
other stars and gathering interstellar gas into  
its accretion disc. We probably would not 
see one well right now, but even within a  
century or two we should be able to comfortably 
spot one even several centuries before arrival. 
This was the catastrophe premise in the prologue 
of our episode Colonizing Alpha Centauri and is  
to this day the only natural catastrophe I’d say 
represents a true threat to humanity’s existence  
beyond the next century or so, and even then, only 
for a few centuries, as it would endanger not just  
Earth but all our other planets and asteroid 
habitats and so on. In that episode we pointed  
out that the main risk would be it passing by 
and causing perturbation to eject Earth or put  
us in a bad orbit, though it’s worth noting that 
planetary orbits are not as stable and eternal  
as we tend to think and we could get ejected from 
our solar system without any external astronomical  
disruption coming in from deep space. Of course 
a black hole has far more mass to cause such a  
disruption and it could end up devouring our sun 
explosively too, though more likely would pass  
through in a dangerously perturbative way to 
orbits and possibly devour something smaller  
in a vicious blast of gamma radiation.
Now humanity would be in a good position  
to survive this if we already had a decent 
supply of space habitats and asteroid colonies,  
and getting yourself in the orbital wake of such 
a behemoth leaves you in a powerful position as  
we’ve discussed in other black hole episodes. A 
stellar mass black hole is a rare and valuable  
object we are likely to actively seek out and 
colonize around, but trying to save Earth from  
a close passage of one is a definite uphill fight 
and the sort best done by a Kardashev-2 Scale or  
interstellar civilization with some practice at 
stellar engineering and the resources implied,  
as you will need to be throwing the mass of whole 
planets at such an object to move it much off  
course and it will be blowing that mass out 
as ultra-high energy radiation as you do this,  
which is exactly what makes them so valuable if 
you can do this in a controlled and long term  
fashion, as opposed to trying to starlift your 
sun to provide a matter beam to hit it with or  
chucking planets at it or trying to build a 
megastructure around it to create one of the  
stellar engines we discussed in Fleet of Stars 
to make it a big spaceship under your control. 
This is exactly the sort of tasks self-replicating 
machines like von Neumann Probes presumably excel  
at, along with making paper clips, but we 
have to worry about them going crazy or  
encountering some alien Hegemonizing Swarm. 
These don’t have to be dumb but it’s usually  
assumed they are fairly locust-like and stupid 
as you don’t give such things tons of brains  
unless you’re feeling especially reckless 
and suicidal as a species. As such they  
represent a sort of in-between case straddling 
natural catastrophes and intelligent enemies. 
They are the locust swarm or sledgehammer 
hurricane that comes to your planet intent on  
turning it into more of themselves, or automated 
killamajigs, or paperclips or whatever they wander  
space doing. We tend to assume their exploratory 
probes or automated terraforming machines run amok  
and might be our own coming back to say hello 
from an early space settlement effort. Which at  
least means you have some forewarning and an 
instruction manual. See your favorite sci-fi  
show for handling the variations of these but I 
would rate them as considerably more likely to  
trouble us and in a serious way than any of the 
natural disasters we’ve discussed to this point. 
Your biggest ally here is that you do have brains 
and you can even consider defenses like releasing  
other self-replicating machines that specializes 
in killing these other ones or hijacking them,  
like immune systems or viruses do.
As I’ve mentioned on other occasions,  
while I don’t expect to find any intelligent 
aliens in this galaxy or their left over toys  
or mistakes, if there had been other intelligent 
civilizations out there that made it to space,  
I would have expect the reason for their 
absence and our continued existence to be  
because a lot of these sorts of devices and 
counter-agents had gotten deployed and left  
whole ecosystems of dumb machines and gray 
goo infesting regions of the galaxy. See our  
Aliens vs AI episode and its discussion of 
the aliens known as the Recluse and their  
crazy sector of space for more contemplation 
of that. But in the end, brains beat muscle,  
especially when those brains can make machines 
that can make more of themselves to give you  
more muscle at your disposal, because brains are 
even better when armed with a giant space gun. 
Once you start putting brains and malice into 
play, things get worse of course, and we have  
to consider not just aliens but intelligent 
AI and options like angry interstellar space  
settlements of renegades or mutants deciding 
they want to wipe us out. This is where RKMs,  
Relativistic Kill Missiles and Nicoll Dyson 
Beams come into play, and the former are small  
and discrete hunks of metal with a little 
bit of detection and guidance on them,  
moving at near light speed, while the latter is 
basically a star converted into a giant laser. 
See our orbital defense platforms episode for a 
full discussion of how to protect against these  
sorts of attack along with fleets and armadas, 
but it tends to be like a lot of warfare,  
if your enemy is building it, you do too, and 
you use smaller forms for protection and threats  
of mutually assured destruction. Diplomacy is 
generally in play once other intelligence is  
involved too, albeit it might be very limited and 
confined to nothing but threats of mutual murder.  
But if someone is throwing dumb matter at you at 
super-high speeds, you defend by being ready to  
detect that far out and throw something dumb in 
its path to destroy both. And you build response  
systems the enemy knows exist so that they know 
if they attack your homeworld with some doomsday  
devices, some doomsday devices you’ve got on 
alert in deep space or at another star system  
will launch on them, and you make sure you’ve 
got lots of scattered colonies who can survive  
you or accept refugees, or get you some vengeance.
Of course, they may be the ones attacking you too,  
and that brings us to our final threats 
for discussion today, a giant alien armada,  
because this is both more and less survivable than 
it might at first seem. As we’ve discussed in our  
alien civilization series, there’s not much motive 
to conquer Earth unless you subscribe to the idea  
that all the resources in the Universe must be 
yours or that all other intelligence must be  
wiped out, in which case its very statistically 
unlikely that in a galaxy billions of years older  
than our own planet such a species would just 
happen to have never evolved until maybe the last  
million or so years and just now be reaching us.
They do not and never needed any signal from us to  
alert them we existed, because Earth is very 
visible, and the galaxy is not a dark forest  
to them, because they either chopped it all down 
for lumber or set the whole thing on fire to help  
them see and kill their prey. That means that odds 
are if there are aliens nearby us who could send  
armadas, they are numerous in kind and type, with 
many of them not being motivated to consume all  
or exterminate all. Thus anyone trying to do that 
doesn’t just have us to worry about, which would  
be no worry at all right now, they would trash 
us completely if they showed up tomorrow, but  
all those other neighbors, be they other aliens 
or disparate colonies, and their own internal  
factions and feuds too, act as a check on them.
Again, see our Alien Civilization and Fermi  
Paradox series for more discussion of those sorts 
of scenarios, Earth might get destroyed for some  
seemingly weird reasons by aliens like uploading 
our minds to a virtual sub-verse or sending the  
Vogons in to demolish Earth to make way for 
a hyperspace bypass. At the moment at least,  
they seem to either not exist anywhere 
near us or not be interested in conquering,  
absorbing, or obliterating us.
Ultimately, I wouldn’t want us to  
rely on that good fortune of having friendly and 
non-expansionist neighbors. The best way to defend  
Earth is to develop space and technologies to 
help us detect threats earlier and prepare robust  
measures. And the best way to defend humanity is 
to explore and develop space and make sure not  
all of humanity is located on this one beautiful, 
precious, but terribly vulnerable, Pale Blue Dot.
Odds are if you’re watching this show you’re 
a big fan of science, and probably like me  
enjoy scifi too, be it books, TV, video games, or 
good old tabletop RPGs. I’ve been rolling dice,  
making characters, running games, and building 
settings for almost thirty years now and  
as you’d probably guess, I tend to be noted 
for the depth of worldbuilding I tend to do,  
and if you’re running a tabletop, or writing a 
novel or designing a game, the audience always  
appreciates those extra touches that help with 
immersion and adding depth to the setting. 
That’s where World Anvil can be an amazing tool 
for organizing your campaigns or stories, and also  
for helping craft content and share it. World 
Anvil, the award-winning Worldbuilding Toolset  
is an amazing suite of software for gaming and 
worldbuilding that lets you use all the awesome  
modern computerized options while still enjoying 
the versatility of pencil and paper gaming, or  
fantasy and sci fi novel writing for that matter.
Create customized articles and entries,  
interactive maps, wiki-style presentations, 
character chronicles, event timelines,  
genealogies of characters, and many other awesome 
features to help you craft your world. World Anvil  
is also amazing for helping you run your game, 
with a Digital GM screen & campaign manager  
with support for over 45 tabletop RPG systems, 
including a robust library of character sheets  
and stat blocks. Not to mention wonderful 
tutorial videos exploring features to make  
it easy for you and your players to use, and 
giving great worldbuilding and storycrafting  
ideas to help you on your Hero’s journey. 
World Anvil has all the tools you need, to  
try it out, just click the link in this episode’s 
description and start forging new worlds, today!
So as I mentioned this episode is one the 
foundational topics of the National Space Society,  
as is last week's episode on Clean Energy 
from Space, and I wanted to thank John Dagle,  
Dale Skran, and Rod Pyle from the NSS for lending 
their expertise to writing these episodes. Every  
year we host the International Space Development 
Conference, where experts in the field,  
be they from NASA to commercial space leaders 
like Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos have given talks,  
and where you can meet with astronauts and 
best-selling sci-fi authors. This year’s  
conference is in Los Angeles at the Sheraton 
Gateway, May 23rd to 26th, and will be hosted  
by Melissa Navia, helmsman Ortegas from Star 
Trek Strange New Worlds. We also give out  
awards and two folks coming by to receive them 
this year will be my good friend Brian McManus,  
from the amazing show Real Engineering, and 
the legendary William Shatner. Come join us  
as we boldly explore strange new worlds.
Speaking of scifi, this weekend it will  
be time again for Sci Fi Sunday here on 
SFIA, where we’ll be looking at the idea  
of Stargates and parallel devices for bridging 
between worlds and ask if there’s any theories  
bridging between science and scifi there. Then 
we’ll take a look at a different type of tunnel,  
the immense lava tubes on the Moon, and what life 
in those might be like for lunar settlers. Then  
we’ll finish out the month with a pair of episodes 
looking at colonizing white dwarf star systems,  
bringing new life to those dead stars, 
and binary star systems, and their unique  
challenges with habitable zones and stability.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and if 
you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
