Our future lies among the stars, and many
challenges must be overcome to reach them.
One of those challenges is making sure our
ships don’t crash into our own garbage littering orbit.
 
People often discuss if our future spaceships
will be built down here or up in orbit, and
as we discussed a couple months back in our
Episode Starship Factories, it’s just as
likely they’ll be built deeper out in space
and inside contained dockyards.
Here fragile ships under construction don’t
have to worry about tiny bits of space debris
hitting them or the construction crews, who
also don’t have to worry that any lost nut
or bolt or sliver of metal will drift off
into space and strike someone moving on a
different orbital path like a bullet.
And this is the danger of orbital debris.
Things orbit our planet faster the lower they
are, and that low orbital region is also the
most valuable, being close to Earth, but they
all crisscross at different speeds and with
those different speeds varying by as much
as thousands of miles or kilometers per hour.
Any tiny fragment of material the size of
pea you collide with carries energy comparable
to what we use for heavy machine guns designed
for tearing lightly armored vehicles or structures
apart.
What they do to people in spacesuits or tissue-paper
thick spacecraft walls is devastating, and
in both cases your fragments from that collision
join that dangerous debris.
One bit of debris strikes something and generates
several times its number in new bits.
The more things you have in orbit, the more
likely this can result in a cascade of damage,
with each successive strike spewing more debris,
which sheds more things, and we call this
cascade Kessler Syndrome.
The more developed you are in space, the more
dangerous this is, as there are more objects
in space to be hit by a bit of debris, resulting
in a higher frequency of collisions and a
faster cascade ending in a thicker cloud of
razor sharp hyper-fast bullets above our planet.
It has the possibility to leave space over
Earth unnavigable and we have even discussed
it as a possible Fermi Paradox Solution, in
Imprisoned Planets, and given how important
space travel is to the show and how this could
threaten that ability, wrecking our journeys
to the stars before they even have left port,
I thought a discussion of managing and clearing
space debris was a good way to wrap the show
up for the year.
Though we will still be having our livestream
Q&A this weekend, on New Year’s Eve, or
afternoon, and that will be our last livestream
for the foreseeable future, so I hope you’ll
join us.
Now our focus today is on technologies that
can remove existing debris from orbit and
be used to prevent buildup or cascades, but
we also need to talk about Detection of Debris,
and after that we’ll discuss removal options,
with the major ones being Active Debris Removal
or ADR Spacecraft, Nets and Harpoons, Laser
Brooms, and many more that we will classify
as collective methods, laser based methods,
ion-beam shepherding, tether-based, sail-based,
satellite-based, unconventional approaches,
and dynamical systems-based methods.
After we cover those, we’ll touch on the
other end of the debris equation, which are
regulation, mitigation, and armor, though
those are not our focus for today, and we’ll
look at space regulation in more depth next
month.
Severity & Detection is the place to start
though because we must be able to detect every
bit of junk that’s dangerous in orbital
space, and it is really easy to forget that
‘dangerous’ means anything much bigger
than a grain of sand and ‘orbital space’
is simply gigantic, it’s easy to forget
that even low orbital space is larger than
the surface area of our entire planet and
much deeper.
One tiny band of low orbit is bigger than
the entire volume of our planet from the deepest
ocean to the highest mountain top.
That works to our advantage in terms of spacing,
it’s huge and not much is up there, but
we need to be mindful that tracking dangerous
space debris is somewhat akin to trying to
track pebbles drifting around our ocean, and
pebbles that move through that entire ocean
every couple of hours.
That’s a bit daunting, and we should remember
that even smaller bits are dangerous too.
A number of grains of sand on a strong gust
of wind or wave can erode strong materials,
a grain of sand in space is typically carrying
a million times that energy, meaning that
you can get some pretty powerful erosion effects
on equipment up there.
Especially large thin objects like solar mirrors
or shades for power collection and climate
control.
These won’t rip a ship apart but they will
slowly wreck things.
We also have that question of how dangerous
debris is, and it is important to understand
we are not talking about some constant wave
of obliteration running around orbit…
with some exceptions we’ll get to.
It’s kind of like the asteroid belt, in
science fiction it gets portrayed as a dangerous
place you would need to dodge through, in
reality it would be really improbable you
would hit anything even flying blind straight
through one.
Kessler Syndrome was first proposed by Donald
Kessler in 1978 but I first encountered it
20 years later as a freshman physics major,
and not in one of my classes.
I was playing a post-apocalyptic Role Playing
Game called Rifts, which is set after a massive
nuclear war and where there is so much debris
in space that space travel off Earth is considered
impossible, trapping the ruined planet’s
techno-barbarian survivors from their fledgling
colonies on the Moon and Mars.
It’s implied there that it’s not just
the huge amount of orbital debris around the
planet but probably a lot of automated and
possibly self-repairing killer satellites
and orbital defenses designed for killing
ICBMs that’s causing much of the problem.
There’s a modest-sized mutant population
living in the higher orbital regions, which
would have less debris, and more radiation.
And that’s a key point because Kessler Syndrome
dissipates with time and is like a lot of
debris scenarios, such as volcanic eruptions
or asteroid strikes, persistent for years
but quickly declining.
I think we tended to look at the Rings of
Saturn and assume such debris could persist
indefinitely but it’s a different situation.
First, unless you are building thousands of
O’Neill Cylinders in Low Orbit, then you’re
not leaving entire mountains worth of wreckage
around in space.
I don’t think many places outside of this
show and its forums ever contemplate that
degree of orbital development.
Even in a situation like that, the effect
will build slowly in the human timescale,
not wake up one day to red alerts everywhere
and space rendered a ruin of gigatons of bits
of fist-sized debris tearing around.
Also, the further you are from Earth, the
bigger the volume things are spread over and
the lower orbital speed.
So objects higher up are less affected.
Debris can persist longer there though.
Outside of this scenario, we’re not contemplating
your typical spaceship flying up into orbit
and being hit by ruinous collisions inside
a few minutes as it transitions to higher
orbits.
What we really is mean that space stations
up there are in constant danger of severe
damage and that satellites would be too.
Nothing really remains in a stable low orbit
for long, that close to Earth the planet doesn’t
resemble a perfect sphere and thus the gravity
on any orbit is going to vary and tweak its
every orbit.
We also use low orbit because it is as close
to Earth as we can get without lots of atmospheric
drag, but it’s still there minimally and
over time slows anything orbiting up there
till it falls down.
As an example, Saturn’s Ring are immense
and persistent but Saturn’s D-Ring is it’s
faintest and thinnest, and nearest to Saturn,
and yet is still a band 8,700 to 16,300 kilometers
over Saturn’s surface, whereas low orbit
on Earth is roughly 200 to 2000 kilometers
over Earth.
Like Earth, Saturn isn’t a perfect sphere,
though its upper regions are at least pretty
homogeneous in density, no mountains ranges
and oceans massively altering things.
This is why we concluded that Space Debris
and Kessler Syndrome weren’t good Fermi
Paradox solutions in our episode Imprisoned
Planets and the lower the orbit, the quicker
it is going to clear out.
These timelines are on an order of years for
low orbit, with the upper bands of low orbit
being decades and anything under the Space
station’s altitude falling out in a year
or less without station keeping.
Debris is also hardly on stable orbits, and
much would decay in mere days.
Once it starts getting atmospheric drag it’s
basically over and things will burn up, and
pushing things into the atmosphere will be
a lot of debris management methods.
A lot of collision fragment orbits are going
to directly intersect Earth almost immediately
or send fragments into the much more sparse
higher orbital regions.
So I don’t want to say that Kessler Syndrome
is overhyped because it is absolutely a big
deal, but it’s a “heightened accidents
and wear and tear” kind of big deal, not
a Hollywood explosion and ruin kind.
Of course giant explosions would be one way
of handling that, you just start blowing off
nukes anywhere that’s clear of functional
craft and that will clear thicker debris reasonably
quickly, combined with actively towing off
the larger bits.
Now this could reach levels where any spacecraft
there would be at risk of ruin by remaining
even a few minutes but this would be in the
context of huge space battles around vast
space structures which might emit thousands
of gigatons of debris in the first few days
and then continue to emit new debris for years
or even decades after.
Thankfully you only have this problem if you
have a huge orbital infrastructure, and then
it just becomes a long-term maintenance cost
like picking up trash in cities, hardly trivial
but not a make-or-break situation.
And against this threat we would expect many
such space structures to have their own detection
system and point defense options.
They detect some tiny metal ball or fleck
of slag coming their way and automatically
blow it up with a laser or whatever.
We’ll return to this later but for now,
while space is still pretty sparse, good detection
allows us to spot an object, predict its path,
and warn something in that path to exhale
a little air or burn a little fuel to bump
aside.
There’s over 20,000 objects fist-sized or
bigger in space, and one hundred million larger
than a millimeter across, for an estimated
200 tons of garbage in space.
Which sounds huge but there are over a billion
house-sized objects hanging around on Earth
and untold millions of bird-sized objects
in our sky.
Scale matters, and while we do an amazing
job tracking things in space, it’s nothing
compared to what we could do with a bit better
computerization and a more robust space fence
of detection.
Now as we move into removal options, I think
we should start with the preferred options,
especially for big objects, which is a variety
of collection methods.
Large debris can be deorbited to burn up but
a lot of us would prefer to collect it and
recycle it, and nobody disagrees that this
is the optimal approach where viable, the
problem is that unless you have a lot more
orbital infrastructure up there than we do
now, you not only have to burn a ton of fuel
to reach the object, net it, and drag it back
to some facility that does this recycling,
but you also have to have such a facility
and manufacturing in space to use those materials.
This, in conjunction with mitigation and rapid-response
point defense will likely make up the lion’s
share of debris clearance in the more distant
future.
In the shorter term, active debris removal
or ADR Spacecraft are usually defined as a
small ship with a robot arm, harpoon, or net
to grab an existing and defunct satellite
and shove it down into the atmosphere or kick
it up into a graveyard orbit.
Graveyard orbits are those designed mostly
for higher orbits where it would take a ton
of fuel to slam it either into Earth or kick
it to deep space, so we move it up to a less
valuable orbit.
For instance, there’s a very tiny band where
satellites can orbit at 12- or 24-hour periods,
and those are prized and need to be kept clear
of debris, so pushing just a bit higher removes
the problem, at least for some decades.
ADR spacecraft are your means of doing this
to any satellite which has lost the capacity
to deorbit itself, or which is a big fragment
or something that might have gotten wrecked.
If you’ve seen the anime Planetes, where
they follow the crew of a vessel whose mission
is clearing space junk, that is an ADR Spacecraft,
but we tend to assume most cases would be
robotic and piloted from down on Earth.
There’s no real reason to pay to put a crew
in orbit when a groundside facility could
handle it just fine.
In fact you might have that being done by
folks who worked from home and had a primary
control that handled detection and assigning
of a robot to rendezvous and then passed it
off to whichever local controller was on shift
and on that side of Earth when the robot got
into rendezvous range, and possibly passed
it to the next controller as they rotated
out, since the satellite is orbiting the planet
every couple hours or less and being on the
other side of the planet would introduce some
irritating latency issues from signal lag.
Thus someone several thousand miles further
around the planet might get your feed queued
up ten minutes early so they could observe
and take over if you passed your window without
the job being done.
Now this can be a small robot that is mostly
fuel and an arm and just grapples on and drags
itself and its trash down into the atmosphere
but this costs you a probe or trashbot.
Maybe it instead connects a disposable rocket
or harpoon that will do the work and it moves
to the next site, and the next bit of space
garbage.
We could also attach an electrostatic tether
to the dead satellite and let that drag the
satellite down so we need not waste fuel doing
so.
But ideally, we want something refuellable
and this could be an example of where a ship
carried a number of spools of ultra-skinny
and conductive cables to either regenerate
its own orbital momentum – called Electrodynamic
Tethering – or to attach to one of those
junked craft.
Electrodynamic Tethers or EDTs can serve as
a means of propulsion for spacecraft.
When a current flows through the tether, it
interacts with the magnetic field of the planet
or celestial body.
According to the right-hand rule of electromagnetism,
this interaction generates a force that acts
as thrust.
By adjusting the current in the tether, spacecraft
can change their orbits or perform maneuvers
without the need for traditional rocket propulsion.
They need a power supply to do this, pushing
a craft back up, and we discussed this more
in our episode Skyhooks.
A simple solar panel can do the trick, or
RTG, radioisotope thermal generator, as long
as it is fairly massive compared to whatever
it is pushing on and has time to regenerate
momentum from that power supply and electromagnetic
shoving.
However, they can instead generate power by
deorbiting things.
In this same way, a craft might shove off
the satellite it was deorbiting to regain
momentum, or one able to run on a metallic
propellant might cannibalize the object to
give it the resources to shove that object
down and move onto its next meal.
Though in such a situation it would seem implied
that you would have the ability to collect
and recycle the satellite at that point.
I could imagine a small pod not much bigger
than a hockey-puck that was mostly a spool
of wire around a RTG or inflatable solar panel
that just magnetically clapped onto a satellite,
unspooled and unfurled, and shove the satellite
down, or dragged it up to a graveyard orbit
or collection orbit, and a sophisticated one
might be able to disconnect, drift away, and
wind up for collection itself, once done towing
the defunct satellite.
The same applies for things using radiant
pressure, such as a solar sail.
Here something hockey-puck sized might unfurl
to several thousand times that size and let
solar wind, sunlight, or even a pushing beam
hit it to in turn move the collected junk.
Spacecraft of this type, along with solar
shades or collectors in general, have the
advantage of being able to disconnect their
main body from their sail with a decent mutual
shove sending the main body into the atmosphere
or a graveyard orbit while letting the sail
blow away to deep space or down into the atmosphere.
If we ever get good at making graphene and
sails made out of it, this might be a standard
Deadman switch package on orbitals too, some
tiny pod able to unfurl to a million times
its normal size and designed to flip on when
on the dayside of the planet to shove a spacecraft
right down into the atmosphere.
In the very long term you have to worry about
tiny bits of dust making smog around the planet,
eroding things if not causing gross collision
damage, just from the sheer quantity of objects
and activity in space for a Kardashev-1 Scale
civilization.
This material is rough on ultra-thin and big
objects like solar shades or collectors.
Much of this might be metal and subject to
removal of buildup by electromagnets, but
much would also be blown away by solar wind
and sunlight pressure.
We might also be able to modify the big thin
collector into an active dust collector and
one that could fold itself for pick up or
atmospheric burn up when it got too big, assuming
it could use the material it collected to
regenerate itself and export some.
A key notion here, and a big one for waste
management on Earth, is not that it’s that
hard to do, it’s that it represents a constant
drain on your economy at every level, so the
idea is to find ways to pull some revenue
in from recycling your junk or to minimize
the cost of disposal.
Space is incredibly expensive and to become
profitable and something you or I can go visit
one day, we need to make space cheaper and
that means minimum disposal cost.
From that I deduce that in the future you
will always have a certain haze of garbage
around a developed planet because there will
be an optimum point.
Collection is cheaper the thicker your trash
is, and beneath a certain threshold we can
simply place armor and point-defense lasers
on space stations and craft.
It is also why I tend to assume a more developed
space in the future is one heavier on megastructures
like orbital rings or space towers, even in
high orbits, because spaceship must literally
emit tons of propellant to operate, which
adds to that smog, and will inevitably lose
little bits of themselves when employing ultra-high-thrust
options like rockets that are brutal on physical
components.
But speaking of point-defense and lasers,
this is where the Laser Broom comes into play.
Laser Brooms are not what most folks think,
some big laser vaporizing an object, because
that’s rather energy intensive.
You can do this, and I suspect something like
an O’Neill Cylinder would have a battery
of these for managing unexpected space debris
hurtling its way and undetected till the last
moment, but the laser broom is a lower energy
approach.
Comets have tails composed of sun-vaporized
material and this changes the comet’s orbit
a bit.
It is essentially a weak rocket flame of matter
boiling off the surface and shoving off the
comet, providing thrust.
So if we see an object near Earth we want
to de-orbit, instead of sending an ADR spacecraft
there, we could just target it with a laser
and vaporize off a little of its upward or
forward surface to shove it back or down a
little.
You are laser-ablating a bit of super-hot
gas off the object to give it thrust in the
desired direction.
Interestingly this is a high-thrust option
for a laser pushing system for accelerating
normal spacecraft, as you can have a big pusher
plate you vaporize off the back, akin to how
the Orion drive works, minus the nuclear explosions.
This is also a decent option for small satellites
that you don’t want to try to put guidance
and propulsion on.
You just build its exterior shielding out
of a material that laser ablates well and
give it little taps with a laser pulse when
you need some station-keeping.
It also means it's better shielded against
minor collisions and that any extra debris
it adds to space from such a collision is
that same material that’s easy to laser
ablate.
You could also be using ion beams for this
instead of lasers, especially if the object
had a power supply able to generate a small
electromagnetic field for those ions to shove
off of instead of physically striking.
One other option of note is that light doesn’t
push evenly on things, in terms of their own
momentum change.
The thinner an object is, the more push it
gets from some laser, flashlight, or ion beam.
So scattered dust and gas gets shoved by such
beams just as well as solar sails, whereas
your typical spaceship or celestial object
barely notices it, which is why space in this
solar system is pretty empty.
Any dust or gas that doesn’t get drawn onto
a bigger object like a planet tends to blow
away under the sun’s radiant pressure and
solar wind.
This allows us to clear smog and smaller motes
of junk out of orbital space by being patient
or if it’s accumulating too quickly, running
focused light beams through the area that
will do nothing to all the spacecraft and
megastructures there but blow the tinier fragments
away.
In very extreme cases you might use laser
ablation as a wide broom to sweep massive
sectors or orbital space in a hurry, and those
might be anything from a bomb-pumped lasers
to a secondary function of laser pushing beams
or energy transmission beams.
There are many other proposed methods, foam,
nano-satellite swarms, magnetic nets, space
drag sails or bristles, and even biodegradable
satellites have been proposed as well, but
that’s some of the more discussed ones.
Of course, the best methods to clear debris
is to either not make it in the first place
or to get it right away, which is where Mitigation
& Regulation come in.
As we already mentioned, detection is the
key to protecting other assets from space
junk but it’s a reality that a lot of that
junk is the product of careless, reckless,
or indifferent deployment of spacecraft.
It’s easy to talk of monitoring and agreements
of how and when a satellite should be taken
down but we do need to be mindful of defense
considerations.
As a reasonable and practical approach, you
probably would want some treaty that covered
what nations agreed to do in their defense
satellites and spacecraft, like redundant
self-destruct mechanisms for deorbiting the
satellite while wrecking secret technologies
inside it.
Something that provides no significant new
cost or hindrance to the defense satellite’s
function and mission would probably be viable
as a voluntary enforcement strategy.
For everything else, it should be doable to
have everything tracked and have it understood
that if it doesn’t have a plan for deorbiting
and a redundant plan too, then it doesn’t
fly, and if it loses the ability to keep its
status known and that function available,
it gets itself deorbited by whatever laser
or killer sat anti-satellite system is running.
We’ll cover regulation more next month but
I think this is where we see a lot of rules
about tethering gear to spacecraft or astronauts
when EVA and not dumping garbage out of airlocks
or the bottom of orbitals except in a container
like a radar reflective bag on a clear de-orbiting
path.
Otherwise you end up getting the equivalent
of trash islands in space too, as they are
prone to going into certain orbital resonances,
indeed this is the loose idea behind dynamical
systems-based methods of debris clearance,
which aims for math heavy and fuel-light approaches
to clearance, which we’re mostly skipping
over with that math-heavy aspect in mind but
generally still uses those other approaches,
just uses them more precisely, and I suspect
we would see those methods improved for efficiencies
sake, and you might have big recycling depots
at some of those spots where trash tended
to slowly gather.
Ultimately we need to remember that this will
be a growing problem anywhere in Cislunar
space as we develop into the wider solar system,
and that those larger gravity wells like Mars
or Venus or the other planets will tend to
accumulate junk eventually too.
I think this is another reason why we should
expect to see bigger ships carrying thicker
armor in the future, or cellular armor made
of many small tanks fuel of fuel or water,
because the bigger you are, the cheaper thicker
armor is, under the cube-square law, for a
given volume of cargo or passenger.
A big sphere made twice as wide has 4 times
the surface area to armor but 8 times the
internal volume, so eight times the mass for
four times the armor, which lets you double
your armor thickness or save on armor mass
proportionally.
And you can’t really control what the overall
frequency of space clutter in your voyages
is, that’s a civilization scale problem,
and there may be strong regulation of range
and capability of point-defense systems on
ships and habitats, those are weapons systems
after all, but you can control how thick your
spaceship or space station skin is.
And if everyone is armoring up fairly heavily,
that does mean they’ll resent paying more
for clearance of debris that’s below what
would trouble them.
So I suspect we will see a bit of haze of
clutter up there as we grow in the centuries
to come, and only time and technological advancement
will tell how thick that haze might be, indeed
it might be lower than it is now.
Or it might be an astronomically visible technosignature
of planets owned by space faring civilizations.
Either way Space Debris is a problem and one
getting worse everyday, so putting off solutions
doesn’t pay.
But as we saw today, there’s plenty of methods
to clear the junk away.
Our theme today is that even in a place as
empty as space, civilization’s garbage might
be our downfall if not properly managed, and
while I think we demonstrated it was manageable
today, if we turn out to be wrong we might
see humanity’s future in space taking a
pathway where civilization broke into small
dangerous fragments, like that debris in space
does, to avoid areas where cascade collisions
were possible.
This is the idea that civilization itself
might become a dangerous handicap, or at least
be viewed as one, by some groups or individuals
and that this could be a possible Fermi Paradox
solution.
That people might turn into hermits living
in deep space and just grabbing what resources
they can while trying to stay far from others,
what we’re calling the Hermit Shoplifter
Hypothesis.
We examined that more in this month’s Nebula
exclusive.
That’s out now on Nebula, where you can
not only see every regular episode of SFIA
a few days early and ad free, but all our
other bonus content, including extended editions
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives
like, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark
Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As An
Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or
& Free Will, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing
Binary Stars, and more, like next month’s
upcoming Giant Space Monsters episode, out
New Year’s Day.
Using my link and discount, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and my code, isaacarthur, Nebula is available
for just over $2.50 a month, but this holiday
season we are once again offering Lifetime
Memberships to Nebula for $300, part of which
goes directly to our show, and part to help
raise capital for a number of creator-owned
projects we’re greenlighting for 2024.
Instead of a monthly subscription, lifetime
memberships are a one time payment where you
can get access to everything that’s on Nebula
now and in the future, including our quickly
growing catalog of exclusive movies, plays,
shows, documentaries and more.
And right now for the holidays you can even
gift a lifetime membership of Nebula’s life-changing
and stimulating content.
Monthly, annual or lifetime, whichever you
choose, you not only get access to all of
the great stuff Nebula offers, you’ll also
be directly supporting this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content like Hermit
Shoplifter Hypothesis, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So this was our final regular episode for
the year and this weekend, on New Year’s
Eve at 4 pm Eastern time, we will be having
our final monthly livestream Q&A . After 5
years and 60 Q&A livestreams we’ll be going
on hiatus, and it seemed a good number and
time for a change.
And it’s certainly been a year of change
for me and almost entirely a good one, getting
used to being a father while juggling everything
else I do in life has been a difficult, memorable,
exhausting, and rewarding endeavor and I’m
very fortunate to have an awesome audience
who shares my fascination with our future.
As we move into the tenth year of this show
I just wanted to thank everyone for joining
me on that journey.
Which we’ll be continuing in January with
a very packed schedule.
As mentioned we have January's Nebula exclusive
on Giant Space Monsters coming out on the
first, then on January 4th, we’ll return
to the Fermi Paradox to discuss the possibility
of colony and ecology failure and Pancosmorio
Theory.
On Sunday, January 7th, we will deep dive
into the functions and uses of Statite, Lagites,
Quasites, Solar Moths, Mag Sails, and other
alternatives to classic Keplerian Satellites
and Orbits that offer us the possibility to
move stars or transform solar systems.
And speaking of transformation, in the future
we might transform animals into more intelligent
critters or even human intelligence, in a
process called uplifting, and in two weeks
we’ll discuss the ethical challenges of
that endeavor.
Then on January 14th it will be time for Scifi
Sunday and a look at Aliens vs AI, and which
is a greater threat to us and who would win
in a fight between the two.
As mentioned in today’s episode, a lot of
space debris management is going to come down
to regulation, and we’ll discuss regulating
space three weeks from now on January 18th,
then in 4 weeks we’ll talk about settling
our LAgrange Points and why a society at L5
would be awesome.
Then we’ll close out the month with a look
at how our universe might have began, or how
other previous universes might have predated
us, in Conformal Cyclic Cosmology.
One month, 8 episodes, a strong start for
2024.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content
like Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis or Giant
Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, have a Great
Week, and I hope you too have had a Great
Year!
