We sometimes consider that life might be so
rare that we have the whole galaxy of trillions
of worlds all to ourselves, and yet the cosmos
is made of billions and billions of galaxies,
so aliens would surely still be common on
the grander scale.
But what if humanity is truly alone in the
Universe?
From the earliest days of this show we’ve
talked about humanity’s future in a way
that tended to assume we would have the galaxy
to ourselves, and we have often discussed
a future in which aliens are a rarity and
maybe so rare we might claim this whole galaxy
and built telescopes fueled by entire stars
before we even spotted the signs of a distant
civilization a billion light years away.
This is a concept that, like colonizing the
Moon or Mars, is so critical to the show’s
discussions that it probably needs updated,
but beyond that, it’s a giant topic no single
episode can ever cover with lots of implications.
Indeed, I never have covered the case where
humanity is genuinely the first civilization
in the Universe, period, not just our local
sector.
That’s a very different case than aliens
just being rare, in terms of how a civilization
is going to act and view things if it gets
out on the galactic scene and just never sees
anyone else.
So I thought today we would explore the reasoning
for us being ultra-rare or even unique, along
with how it might impact the worldview, or
galaxy view, of our civilization.
It can seem like that when I talk about having
the whole galaxy to ourselves, nearly a trillion
stars almost all of which have multiple planets
we could terraform and call home and asteroids
we could forge into uncountable space habitats.
And yet for every star in this galaxy there’s
another galaxy far off.
If the Galaxy was compared to Earth, then
our solar system and all its worlds and resources,
even out to the Oort Cloud, would be a spot
of ground the size of a house.
Scale that up so that the Observable Universe
being Earth, and all the galaxy would be that
house, and our world a lone speck of dust.
Indeed it's quite possible the true Universe
would be an entire scale higher, or even infinite,
we can only see those bits of it close enough
for their light to reach us.
Even then, as our Observable Universe expands,
most of the galaxies we see now are already
far further away, and no signal sent today
by us to them, or vice-versa, would ever be
received.
While modern physics tells us nothing in this
Universe can move faster than light, the Universe
itself is an exception, and may do so.
It is simply being stretched wider, things
inside can be pulled apart faster than light,
but things trying to travel between each other,
be it ships or signals, cannot move internally
faster than that, and thus most of the Universe,
even the Observable Universe, is beyond any
chance of ever being reached even by signal.
There’s space enough for hundreds of empires
to arise right now and never know each other
existed as the universe expanded apart faster
than their birth cries could reach other,
let alone their colony shops.
It's an irony that the Observable Universe
grows in size every instant, but the number
of things in it we can see shrinks, and even
smaller those parts we can still reach.
Almost 14 billion years after the Big Bang,
most of what we can see now will be forever
out of the reach of even near-light speed
ships, and were we to have arisen another
14 billion years later, only the few dozen
neighboring galaxies out of all those billions
would ever be ours, assuming no one arose
sooner and claimed them for themselves.
At some point in the Universe the first interstellar
colony spacecraft was invented, or will be
invented..
At some point the first truly massive array
able to send a message across billions of
light years was made or will be made.
The longer that takes, the smaller the number
of worlds, stars, and galaxies such ships
or signals might reach.
Today we will ask if we are the first, period,
as opposed to simply the first in this region
of the Universe, yet still far down on the
list of first civilizations, several hundred
or even thousand down the line, from that
first interstellar empire, as contemplated
in the Grabby Aliens Scenario, see that episode
for details.
The default perspective of this show is that
others have arisen and sent out those ships
and signals, but the ships move slower than
the signals and no such signal has been received.
If a civilization a billion light years away
arose 999 million years ago, their signal
is still heading our way.
Indeed it’s not just a million years out
still, as we would expect, because the Universe
expands at about 7% of the speed of light
for every billion light years, meaning if
you launched a ship from here or there at
7% of light speed it’s never going to arrive.
The furthest you could travel, even with a
ship moving at 99.9% of light speed is 13.8
billion years, non-coincidentally almost the
same as the age of the Universe, and that’s
the furthest you could send a signal.
This isn’t how far away the furthest galaxies
we can see are, as the light we see from the
left to reach us back when we were all closer
together, hence we can see galaxies 35 billion
light years away, the current record, because
that’s how far away they are now, not 13.5
billion years ago when the light we see left
them, nor of course do they look much like
they did back then.
Incidentally you will typically hear distances
to those furthest objects given as 13-billion-something,
and that’s because that’s the age of the
light as it reaches us and its redshift, and
we usually care about the age more than the
modern and unreachable distance, which is
known as its proper distance.
If you know somethings proper distance, in
billions of light years, then you can tell
what speed we need a ship to be able to travel
to ever reach it by multiplying the billion
of light years by 0.07.
If your maximum ship speed is 70% of light
speed, you can reach an object with a proper
distance of 10 billion light years from us,
and it will take us a lot longer than 10 billion
years to arrive, and this is still only a
small corner of the Universe, less than 1%.
This is why I usually don’t care much about
the question of if we’re the only civilization
to arise in our local supercluster around
a billion light years across or the whole
Observable Universe which has around 10 million
superclusters.
Because it's not likely you’d have civilization
that originated that far apart bumping into
each other and ever interacting, and even
if there ships moved at 99% of light speed,
you still have millions of years of advance
warning that there ships and colony expansion
wave is going to arrive compared to their
various signals and light-speed fingerprints.
You will sometimes hear folks say no alien
signal could be heard even a hundred light
years away, let alone a billion, but this
is simply wrong, and speaks to an assumption
they send radio signals the way we do on this
planet, intended for planetary consumption.
That’s like saying we can’t hear or speak
to people on a distant mountaintop, by normal
speech, and thus can’t make ourselves known,
seen, or heard.
But you can build a drum, for instance, and
it won’t relay human speech but no one will
mistake it for noise.
Or a fire whose light you flicker or move
a mirror in, and no one will mistake that
for something natural either.
We do have radio telescopes and use them to
look at distant stars and galaxies, we look
at pulsar stars which oscillate and pulse
in the radio range and can be seen galaxies
away too.
So it's not that we expect to hear aliens
in distant galaxies by their casual terrestrial
radio shows, especially as they probably go
digital as podcasts have before long, but
instead by their immense beacons or the waste
heat of their whole civilization.
You can build enormous space telescopes that
could pick up very faint signals too.
Ones that could pick up normal radio signals
across a whole galaxy, albeit probably with
a lot of noise, but then with enough receivers,
a wide enough spread between them, possibly
light years, and enough computing power, that
matter can be handled too.
Currently the Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence, SETI, can legitimately say we
don’t know that there are any interstellar
empires, that practical space colonization
might be rare, and with it massive beacons
and massive telescope arrays and a super abundance
of energy for powering inefficient but loud
transmitters.
So it might be that you only have a home world
and maybe the alien equivalent of our Moon
and Mars on which those aliens ever colonized,
maybe Dyson Swarms weren’t possible either,
too fragile to exist during internal conflicts
as we’ll discuss this weekend, in our Planetary
Civil Wars episode Maybe the nearest alien
world is technological, about the same as
ours, even if older, and just a thousand light
years away.
In such a case we couldn’t hear them now
or they us.
And there could be millions of such civilizations
in our galaxy and maybe a trillion in the
supercluster and more like a quintillion in
the Universe.
All fairly isolated places who chat over millennia,
where their nearest neighbor sent them a message
in Julius Caesar’s time and they got it
when William the Conqueror landed in Kent
and today we’re getting their reply to Caesar
from William arriving and now to the Secretary
General of the UN, whose follow up message
will arrive in the hands of Kang the Conqueror
in the 30th century.
And so nobody much bothers with mega-beacons.
And we talked about that option more last
week in our episode on post-SETI operations.
But picking up there, if a century or two
from now we have a colony ship arriving around
Alpha Centauri and a hundred space habitats
built in orbit of Earth or in the asteroid
Belt and settlements on the Moon and Mars
and Venus and Europa and Titan, well that
starts really pushing back on the idea that
there are only isolated homeworlds, and them
short lived before nuking themselves into
oblivion.
And if in the year 3000 we have a vast space
array in our Oort Cloud and others at our
thousands of interstellar colonies inside
a light century of here, then the idea that
the aliens are hiding from us or can’t colonize
or that we just can’t hear them gets real
dubious.
If and until that day comes where we have
interstellar colonies sending out their own
colony ships and space arrays and beacons
big enough they could pick each other up at
galactic distances, or their alien versions
in those galaxies, then we can’t simply
assume intelligent life colonizing the galaxy
is rare because such life is rare.
Prior to that we could say it's decently common
but tends to end in nuclear apocalypses or
AI run amok then shutting down or failed colonies
that just never get going.
If that scenario I just laid out happens though,
then in the year 3000, the Fermi Paradox is
probably going to be considered pretty solved.
Mind you it might have gotten solved earlier
by aliens arriving or us getting a signal,
but we’re talking about a scenario where
the status quo of silence has remained but
humanity has spilled out to neighboring stars
and successfully and in the beginnings of
a cascade or snowball to the galaxy at large.
And has done so with ever-bigger astronomical
gear able to make Hubble or Kepler or Webb
look like dinky little toys and still not
seen a single K1, K2, or K3 civ.
Now if we do see a K3 civ out there, a big
sprawling galaxy wide heat signature around
some distant galaxy, then spotting it and
a few other basically confirms the Grabby
Aliens Scenario and lets us calculate about
how frequently life emerged to intelligence
and how that increased over time and how much
of the Universe is essentially ours to garden,
which would generally be counting not planets
and stars but galaxies or superclusters.
And it’s the year 3000 and we still haven’t
seen even that.
What’s the new dynamic?
Well even in a Grabby aliens scenario of just
a few thousands intergalactic empires, not
billions of galactic ones or untold quadrillions
of interstellar empires, someone has the be
civilization 1 and it could be us as easily
as anyone else, especially in a sample size
of thousands not quadrillions.
You’re also hardly guaranteed to be #1 unless
you’ve already been expanding for billions
of years and still never heard anyone else,
since we could have just 1 alien home world
per supercluster, still have 10 million supercluster-sized
empires in the Observable Universe, and still
not have seen even the nearest one if nobody
really started popping up till a couple billions
years ago and less often then than now, and
by minimal coincidence the nearest dozen were
all only a billion years old or less.
Incidentally these are not really empires,
it's more like their homeworld was that first
amoeba in the ocean and by the time the ocean
– or supercluster of galaxies – was all
colonized, those amoeba aren’t even vaguely
uniform in species let alone in unified leadership
and goals.
Which is why it's hard to assume any unified
policy like being silent or leaving primitive
worlds alone, could be in place.
Its like assuming because you and I and a
bee hive and an oak tree and a bear all share
common ancestry from that amoeba, that we
would all have some treaty we all agreed to
and followed about leaving new bacteria alone.
Which restates our normal assumptions about
the Fermi Paradox and Galactic Empires and
how that’s not likely to be a proper term
anyone ever gets to use.
But that’s still far ahead, it’s the year
3000 and we aren’t seeing anything like
that and our knowledge of physics hasn’t
been upended, so nobody has found some awesome
portal to new Universes we can colonize or
harness for power or flee to in order to escape
entropy.
Just a big old boring Universe we’re colonizing
and making interesting.
What’s the state of the Fermi Paradox now?
It also matters if we have found life on other
worlds and what that looks like.
Was it simple algae, was it complex ecologies
with critters but dumb, was it even worlds
with intelligent life but just nothing technological?
Let’s consider these four cases then – a
universe where we have found not one single
speck of life anywhere, even microbes.
One in which it was common enough but nothing
really complex, one in which it was complex,
occasionally, but not smart, and one where
it wasn’t technological but plenty of dolphins
and chimps and maybe even cavemen were around,
maybe even with fire, after all we apparently
had fire for a million years before we made
ceramics or metals with it.
One note before we jump into those.
We’ll be talking here about how humanity
might react to perceived uniqueness as opposed
to simple rarity, but in terms of rarity,
finding out that humans are 1 in thousand,
in the sense of 1 in 1000 star systems spawns
something like us, or 1 in a million or 1
in billion or even 1 in a billion-billion,
still needs to be viewed relatively.
Your brain is what matters here and weighs
a couple kilograms and the various atoms making
it up having only been doing that job for
some decades.
There’s maybe a hundred billion humans who
have ever lived and only for a few trillion
combined years of lifetime.
That’s maybe 10 trillion kilogram-years
of matter in brain format, and a few dozen
times that if we wanted to include the whole
human mass.
Earth is just a few millionths of the mass
of this solar system which is billions of
years old, and would have something like a
couple billion-trillion times as much matter
dwelling in other formats over the eons, and
if you look at atoms in our solar system,
at any given moment over its history, there’s
only a 1 in 10^27 chance, a trillion-quadrillion,
that an atom happened to be part of a human
brain at that time.
So we’re already dealing with a staggeringly
huge number and staggeringly improbable setup
before ever we leave this planet or star.
We estimate there’s something like a couple
hundred billion-trillion stars in the Observable
Universe, and from the immensity of that number
we think our uniqueness must freak chance
or a sign things aren’t natural, and both
might be true but we mustn’t be intimidated
by that number, because it's already tiny
compared to the odds already on display in
the one place in the Universe we can examine
in detail and confidently declare lacks any
other civilizations… our own planet.
And even if we did find some morlocks or dolphin-cities
it wouldn’t really shift those numbers much.
Indeed even when you throw in all the biomass
this planets has and all the eons its had
it, we still find that an atom on this planet
spending its time as part of lifeform, even
an amoeba, is worse than lottery odds, and
its chance of even being on this planet as
opposed to the other bodies in this solar
system is similarly rare.
And for our first case looking beyond our
world, we will assume we not only have no
other civilizations but no life at all.
It wouldn’t seem likely that without any
other examples of life the Fermi Paradox would
seem solved, but my hunch is it’s unlikely
to be considered a big issue by that civilization
anymore.
What two or three camps of the Fermi Paradox
dominate things at that point?
You should still have Zoo Hypothesis and Simulation
as an option, that reality was fake or a sublayer,
and we will include the specifically theological
options of us being the one and only creation
of a higher power here too, be it smart aliens
or supercomputers or Creator God.
You may fill in the blank according to your
personal preferences here, though there’s
obviously a vast difference in outlook between
superhuman but finite aliens or precursors
and programmers and infinite creator gods,
which come in a wide variety of outlooks too.
Nonetheless, I would expect this to be the
dominant view in Case 1, albeit it might be
subdivided into a hundred different camps
much as it is now, or a hundred thousand.
It's total speculation but my hunch is that
the idea of a natural world in which we evolved
by random chance is probably viewed with as
much skepticism in this setting as it would
have been a few hundreds years ago.
Most folks currently alive, and by overwhelming
numbers, tend to assume that however old this
world and Universe is, life on it or in it
is not entirely natural, and so it would seem
easy enough for that viewpoint to stay a majority
and even regain ground if we’re out exploring
and settling the Universe, and all we find
is endless dead worlds where life never emerged.
We could call this the Status Quo scenario,
given that it's essentially the world we’ve
lived in for a long time and on the same data,
no strong evidence of life elsewhere.
Though as I noted a few minutes ago, our existing
state as humans is already super-improbable,
long before we even add other planets, stars,
and galaxies in.
Going from 1 in 10^27, the odds of an atom
in this solar system being part of a brain
at any given moment in this solar system’s
existence, to 1 in 10^50, the odds of any
given atom in the Universe being in a human
brain since the Big Bang, is not a tiny change
in anyway, but I think it's easier to hear
those odds and not simply assume there’s
something instantly paradoxical about an apparently
lifeless universe beyond this world, endless
empty planets, all dead and never home to
life till we arrive at them.
Ironically the opposite direction, a Universe
where we found nothing but dead worlds but
where life had emerged a lot, and died off,
from calamity natural or artificial, would
strike as me as one favoring either nihilism
or the more Lovecraftian view of reality being
ancient and immense and being populated by
ancient and immense aliens, and their worshippers
and cattle.
It’s a Universe where you know the answer
to the Fermi Paradox and you really wish you
didn’t, because life would be much more
pleasant if you didn’t know for sure it
was doomed.
See our episode Gods & Monsters for more on
that.
Back to the first case, in a Universe where
everything is just unliving until we arrive,
I tend to feel humanity would view it as a
bit of a Manifest Destiny to go forth and
plant gardens across the galaxy and beyond.
I think it would be a pretty big deal a million
years down the road when we settled the whole
galaxy and folks were stretching out with
intergalactic arks to claim more, and if we
still hadn’t heard from aliens by then,
even just to see their fingerprints on distant
galaxies, I think it would be pretty popular
to assume an unnatural origin and that if
anyone else existed, it was far enough away
we could all expand indefinitely without crashing
into each other in any way anyone back here
would ever need to care about.
The leading edge of our colonies bumping into
some other grabby alien civilization a billion
light years away at the hazy edge of the cosmological
event horizon at that point is not the source
of a future invasion.
That’s all those divergent cousins nearby
you, who are potential aliens and threats,
and the real aliens are just a curiosity that
you probably figure were planted by the Creator/Simulator/whichever
to help make sure the whole Universe was gardened
by someone.
Or some other usage motivation, I just find
terraforming worlds a nice gardening analogy
and a poetic purpose.
In a no-FTL Universe, there’s never going
to be any useful exchange with them anyway,
these other grabby aliens, and it would seem
likely they had developed the same attitude.
We might hate them or vice-versa for taking
away our uniqueness but that’s not really
logically sound, if they exist we never had
it and pointing at your creator and complaining
you only got a few millions galaxies to call
your own rather than a trillion is probably
not going to be viewed a logically or theologically
sound and kind of childish, not that that
alone is likely to stop many folks from doing
it.
All at the same time there’s nothing about
this environment that just proves we are unnatural,
and it all takes place in the backdrop of
many new worlds being founded, so this doesn’t
imply atheists or agnostics have ceased to
exist or even gotten less numerous, or any
sort of unified religion, just a species that
looked around at a huge universe and saw nobody
else, and got an ego-boost out of it, justified
or not.
I think if we are contemplating the case of
encountering lots of life but nothing complex
that its basically the same situation, only
maybe worse, and that would tend to be true
for the others cases too.
We tend to think of ourselves as something
special and unique as a species to begin with,
so finding lots of additional life that was
simpler than what we have here on Earth or
even full dolphin and elephant and chimp smart,
wouldn’t seem likely to humble us much.
And maybe shouldn’t, I’m a big fan of
humanity but never one to say we lack in pride
and couldn’t benefit from a bit more humility,
and I don’t think it would actually change
if I found out for certain tomorrow that we
either did live in an entirely natural and
nihilistic existence or were God’s favorite
critters and most prized creation.
I’m thinking finding out that we’re the
apex species not just of Earth but every world
we haven’t even visited yet that’s covered
in simpler animals or even alien pond scum
is not going to make us suddenly find a big
old slice of humble pie.
And if it did we would probably proudly proclaim
how humble we were compared to our ancestors.
Though to be honest, I’m pretty sure that
even if it turned out we were in the Matrix
and the simulation suddenly ended and we were
an accident or failed experiment we’d find
a way to make ourselves out to be pretty grandiose.
I can imagine an embarrassed programmer showing
up in the sky one day and saying “Not sure
how to tell you this but your world was something
my kid designed and forgot and left running
in the basement and you’ve been sitting
in the basement because I was too lazy to
clean and organize the place and well, when
I found your Universe running there it seemed
wrong to just shut you off and well, here
you are, I figured I should let you know,
and I’ll leave the lights on, good luck.”
I imagine a lot of us would choose not to
believe that or that it was untrue and some
kind of test, but I think even if we did believe
it we would say its proof how awesome we are
to have emerged on our own on a discarded
computer or Petri dish.
Obviously in this context you have to view
the Universe principally through the lens
of the Anthropic Principle, rather than the
Mediocrity Principle we tend to prefer for
science, and it is the literal nature of the
Anthropic Principle to be rather self-centered.
For my part I do think we genuinely are special
and exploring the Universe and finding or
not finding others, people or just other life,
merely helps us clarify how we are special,
and even if we found out the whole Observable
Universe was empty of other life it wouldn’t
prove we were a fluke or created or that there
weren’t countless other universes or that
the unobservable portions of our universe
weren’t infinite and populated too.
We have no idea what the odds of life emerging
are or evolving to complexity or brains or
tool use or starships is, and until we encounter
some other examples of these things we can
only hypothesize and thus far at least, we
haven’t had any success with determining
the odds on any part of life coming about
and it's one of those problems that make accurately
modeling the weather look like modeling a
game of tic-tac-toe.
Indeed one reason to simulate Universes is
to try to guess those odds better through
detailed models.
So we might have to explain to a simulated
universe’s inhabitants we made one day how
we made them in order to figure out how likely
it is we were alone, in our universe, but
at least we could confirm if in their pocket
universe, they were alone.
If we start encountering inhabited worlds,
even if just by mold or slime, then that lets
us use the good old fashioned Mediocrity Principle
and determine the frequency of slime planets
and mold worlds and what factors seem to improve
those odds or hurt them and draw some real
numbers on how often planets will have life.
Same for each other case too.
But even if we found complex and intelligent
life on a planet on every hundredth star we
visited, that still doesn’t solve the Fermi
Paradox, only encountering or seeing another
technological civilization, past or present,
would do that.
As would finding out that our dreams of space
colonization were ambitious but impractical.
Presumably whether it's us or someone else
there was someone who showed up first in this
universe, and indeed probably several different
places, maybe several million, would have
emerged first and been eons thinking they
were alone before ever seeing evidence of
another civilization, even an older one.
Now in science fiction when folks contemplate
this elder race – which would be us in this
case – they explore and get sad they run
into no one else, and maybe start creating
or kindling new civilizations.
That’s poetic but I don’t really think
that would much be the case unless it specifically
was a uni-mind, one big conscious planet or
hivemind.
For the rest of us, well there’s tons of
fellow humans, or aliens, to chat with and
explore alongside, including all your mutant
cousins who settled elsewhere.
It’s also the slow way to do it, seeding
a planet with life and waiting for intelligence
to emerge billions of years later, and with
apparently slim odds of it ever happening
even if you seeded millions of worlds.
If you’ve had advanced technology for thousands
of years, odds are you’re master of genetics
and even formulating entirely new strains
of life that aren’t carbon-based – assuming
you were – and you should be able to terraform
life and even build entirely new sapient species
like hyper-intelligent squids, or dragons
or unicorns, basically from scratch in centuries
not geological timescales.
You might be patient but patience implies
delaying serves a good purpose, and I’m
not seeing one there.
Now you can actually make a strong case for
that singular mind existing by itself and
first.
A Boltzmann Brain – that’s one that simply
assembles by random distribution of atoms
into a mind, not by long evolutionary processes
– is always on the table and in Universes
with different physical constants might be
way more likely to emerge than brains via
evolution, especially as we don’t know the
odds for that anyway.
However, in an evolutionary context it's not
really that hard to imagine a sharp left with
early neurons and multicellular organisms
into something that was basically a big algae
mat and brain and one that evolved a parasitic
or symbiotic ability to infect other organisms
and influence their behavior to its benefit,
to be its hands and feet, so to speak.
That could get ve ry sophisticated, as we
contemplated in our recent episode on the
Gaia Hypothesis, and even up to World Brains,
like we looked at in our Conscious Planets
episode.
And critically, I could see that being a very
fast evolver, something that was up and running
in the first couple billions years of a planet
forming, when photosynthesis was still new,
long before the Cambrian Explosion.
Because there’s not really much complex
there, brains aren’t really that complex
as hardware, anymore than computers are, they’re
just expensive the way we do them and thus
big ones are hard to evolve, but if you’re
a network of simple organisms where the brain
is simply a byproduct of that organism, it's
more plausible I think.
We are not such a mind but I wouldn’t be
shocked if it turned out a vast number of
the first intelligences were such planet brains,
and their own attitude toward colonization
might be very different than ours.
The universe may contain vast numbers of such
world minds and we’re the rare exception.
Alternatively, just as a reminder of how improbable
complex life is, if all Earth’s existence
was compressed into a single year, where the
planet had formed on January 1st and the Moon
Landings happened a fraction of a second before
New Year’s, and every day is 12 million
years and every second 143 years.
Then the Cambrian Explosion didn’t happen
until mid-November and most of the rest of
time life was achingly simplistic.
So we shouldn’t assume that step up is easy
or simple and universal.
Continuing that analogy though, if all Earth’s
timeline was one year, then the Universe itself
is about 3 years old now and two when Earth
was born.
When this episode airs on December 8th, that
would be when the earliest mammal existed
and even dinosaurs were new, and humanity
discovered fire about 10 pm on New Year’s
Eve and figured out how to do pottery and
writing a minute before midnight and our first
colony on Mars should be up by a second into
the new fourth year, our first interstellar
colony a few seconds later, and the whole
galaxy colonized by that first day, probably
early in the morning too, but remember a day
is 12 million years here, and that’s long
enough for colonization at just 1% of light
speed to occur, and odds are good we could
send ships at a high fraction of light speed.
Early in year 4, just a week or two in, we
could easily have colonized hundreds of galaxies,
and by the Spring, tens of thousands, and
a civilization that emerged somewhere else
in the Universe a few months ahead of us,
back when we hit the Cambrian or a little
earlier, could easily be at this state, as
could something that came from a planet a
bit younger than ours who just hit their Cambrian
or their Apollo mission 10% or 20% faster
than we did.
Or some world that was a couple billions years
older but where evolution ran 10% or 20% slower.
They presumably would be asking these same
questions, and someone had to be it, so maybe
it is us, but if it is, then it's not some
species that arrived fast when the Universe
only recently had a handful of rocky planets
like Earth, but long after they were common.
By deduction, the longer the Universe aged
without creating something able to look up
at the sky and ponder if it was alone, the
less likely intelligent life in general would
be, and for the apparent absence we currently
observe, no huge K3 empires in galaxies a
billion light years away, those odds don’t
appear to be super high.
But they could be so rare that even if the
Universe were a million times larger than
what we observe, we might still have only
one sibling or even none.
We truly do not know, but ultimately, to find
out we must head into space, and if the answer
turns out to be no, we were the first, then
with all the more urgency to improve the odds
life will flourish in this galaxy and beyond,
in case anything should happen to Earth.
In the end the stars are our destiny, whether
we’re first or not.
As we head into the holiday seasons it’s
worth remembering that it's often as trying
a time as it is fun, and I get reminded of
the time the Army sent me to Montana in December
for a few weeks and I got to learn the true
meaning of cold and barely got on the last
flight before a storm that would have buried
us in snow till after Christmas.
Needless to say I was grateful for a big collection
of digital audiobooks and headphones, especially
with some of the snoring in the barracks,
and if you’ve ever been stuck at an airport
waiting for a flight you know how nice it
is to have good audio, whether you’re trying
to hear a loved one over the crowd noise on
the phone or just watch a movie or listening
to a book, and a nice pair of noise isolating
earbuds from Raycon is a great gift for yourself,
or a loved one, this holiday season.
And at half the price of other premium audio
brands, you can buy a pair for yourself and
as a gift for a loved one.
Their wireless earbuds, headphones, and speakers
offer premium sound; useful features; an almost-custom,
comfortable fit; and up to 54 hours of battery
life.
They’re just all around great earbuds in
terms of quality, versatility, comfort, and
cost, and if you’re looking for gifts, Raycons
are the way to go, and their durability makes
them great gifts not just for your adult friends
and family but for kids too.
Raycons are sleek and stylish, and come in
a range of colors to match anyone’s style.
You can find Raycon in stores now, like Kohl’s
or Wal-Mart, but let me tell you right now:
you’re always going to get the best deal
when you use my special link: BUY RAYCON dot
com slash isaacarthur.
Click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off
sitewide with code HOLIDAY.
There will also be NEW pop-up deals EVERY
DAY during Raycon’s Countdown to Christmas,
and I’ll try to keep the description box
updated with the latest offers—but just
so you know, you can always go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur
to get the best deals available on Raycon!
So that’s it for today but join us again
this weekend for our Scifi Sunday episode
on Interplanetary conflicts and Civil Wars,
then we’ll be back here next Thursday to
contemplate how we might go about farming
on new planets, like Mars, and in two week
we’ll look at the controversial idea that
our whole Universe might be a black hole,
and also if it would be possible to retreat
into black holes in this Universe and live
inside them.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
