This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
One day, strangers from a strange land may
come to our world, and it is entirely possible
they’ll come as friends or conquerors, bearing
guns or gifts, or seeking sanctuary.
The tricky part will be figuring out which
is which.
For the last couple of months, we’ve been
looking at concepts like Extragalactic Sanctuaries
and Deep Space Habitats and why someone might
live in such places and what sort of someone’s
that might be, and it reminded me of a common
staple of science fiction.
Rather than aliens coming to meet us or conquer
us, they’re actually refugees looking for
a place to live.
The sci-fi film: District 9, looks at the
notion of an alien ship landing in South Africa
in 1982 in an alternate past.
We also see this in the Film and TV show:
Alien Nation, in which we have the alien Newcomers
as a refugee population in California, after
their ship landed in the Mojave Desert, and
we see Terence Stamp playing an alien crime
boss in that movie.
In a way, it’s not too different from his
role as General Zod in Superman 2, or the
2013 reboot, Man of Steel, where Zod and his
followers are essentially refugees of a destroyed
civilization.
It is a reminder as we try to contemplate
this topic, that aliens coming to Earth might
be very much like us, in which case, they
would run the gray spectrum of morality, saints
and crime bosses, but that desperation often
is a door for using and abusing others and
for manipulating others into doing so too.
Another common trope in fiction, often as
a Starter Villain before the Final Boss, is
when it turns out that the alien invaders
attacking Earth are on the run themselves
from some greater and more evil empire that’s
chasing them.
Which is a good point to hit on because it
is making a big assumption; not only that
the aliens possess a similar morality to us,
but also that they would expect our own morality
on arriving.
Nature is not kind to creatures fleeing their
own local ecosystem for a new one.
To be fair, there often would be a welcoming
party inviting you to dinner as the guest
of honor, it's just that you won’t be around
for dessert.
Now, needless to say, the topic of refugees
can be a touchy one that we’ll try to treat
with some respect but I’ll say right out
that we are discussing unknown aliens showing
up, not some species we’ve long had contact
with that’s calling on us for help, and
not fellow humans whose psychology we know
and where we have a lot of news reports and
existing diplomatic channels authenticating
what’s going on.
So, while we’re obviously going to be drawing
parallels to human refugee situations, we
also need to be wary of just assuming all
the same reasoning applies.
Also, from a pragmatic standpoint, any interstellar
spaceship, even a beat up refugee vessel,
might be very hard to say no to under our
normal rule that there is no such thing as
an unarmed spaceship, and of course it's a
treasure trove of technology.
That’s a fair analogy too, given that historically,
saying no to refugees often makes many feel
forced to invade or turn criminal, right or
wrong, they’re desperate, and in the same
way, an awful lot of societies have gained
benefits from refugee cultures showing up.
That’s also true of invasions in many cases,
and of course the practical benefits or losses
ideally isn't supposed to influence our decisions
on ethical matters but we should also be realistic.
So, today we’ll be trying to look at this
set of concepts with some realism and trying
to keep in mind that there is a good chance
that our first encounter with aliens might
be them showing up and asking for a safe port
of call, or invading and us not realizing
we had a potential ally chasing after them,
to cut a deal with perhaps, though they may
not be interested, or they may be interested,
but be an even greater devil.
So, sit back, grab a drink and a snack, slam
that like and subscribe button, and let’s
get rolling!
Before you open your door to a stranger, let
alone a house guest, it helps to know if they’re
a good person, or alien, and it matters how
you define a good person yourself.
If I’m opening the door to a stranger in
the middle of the night to the home in which
my family is sleeping, I’m juggling two
ethical priorities.
My duty to help someone in need who has literally
landed on my doorstep, and my duty as guardian
of all those living inside that house.
The analogy applies to both classic refugee
cases on Earth and with aliens too, and the
terrible aspect of such occasions is that
it gives us the opportunity for cruel actions
to be taken by those who are themselves kind
and generous.
I think with all of us coming out of this
long, emotionally-brutal planet-wide quarantine
from Covid, this no longer feels entirely
like an academic question.
What do you do if an Alien Plague Ship shows
up – full of all sorts of unknown organisms
that might act as invasive species – and
will not respond to any messages.
It is just landing somewhere.
Caution would say: “nuke it”, because
if there’s even a chance of compatible biology,
then all it takes is just one microorganism
getting out of that ship to potentially ruin
our entire ecosystem.
If they come from an ethical civilization,
they’ll understand that we had a lot of
unknowns and did what we could to answer those
before acting, but too much was in the balance
to risk it.
I still couldn’t call that ethical, just
at best the lesser of great evils.
And to place the situation in reverse, if
you or I were the admiral of some Human Space
Fleet, investigating the loss of a scout ship
on an inhabited world, and found out that
they had tried to hail our scout but that
they hadn’t responded, then blew it up in
case it held disease or invasive species,
we wouldn’t open fire on them in retaliation.
We would tell them the name of the scouts
on the ship and ask if that would be an okay
place for us to open a spaceport and embassy
-since it is a crater now anyway- to honor
their sacrifice.
Then we would probably tell them that no ship
of ours would ever seek to land in an alien
ecosystem unless it knew beyond any reasonable
doubt that it was safe, that they would have
blown themselves up rather than imperil an
innocent world, and so either they were incapacitated
and somehow the automated failsafe also failed,
or in blowing it up they had done us the favor
of disposing of some traitors and cowards
anyway.
Since the black box was vaporized, we have
the luxury of giving the crew the benefit
of the doubt.
And back home, we would absolutely court martial
that admiral if they had fired on that world
in revenge.
The same thing would probably apply if we
cracked the ship open and unknowingly killed
the pilot, or even autopsied a dead corpse
that was busy having nanotech revive it.
Curiosity should be a common theme of any
civilization that acquired technology, alien
or not, as should caution.
They will also know the law of unintended
consequences and how often it accompanies
curiosity.
Now, your options vary on your capabilities
and perceived risk.
If it landed in the middle of a desert and
was unresponsive, we could probably firewall
the area and blast the outside with UV radiation
before doming it over.
And that is a gamble, but one which might
pay off with wonderful new technologies and
knowledge.
However, keep in mind we’re not just contemplating
a biological bug slipping out, one from an
environment which might make it more resilient
or survivable to disinfection methods, but
also the random nanobots that probably would
be inside the typical citizen of a spacefaring
civilization.
They’re not going to survive nuclear bombardment,
and they probably have their own failsafes
to keep them from acting without orders outside
their host’s body, but one of those might
be that if the host is effectively dead, the
nanobots are supposed to cannibalize anything
necessary to revive them or store their brain
and send a copy home.
That might mean casually shredding the seals
on their spaceship to let bugs out while ripping
apart the local landscape to build a small
fortress, powerplant, and transmitter, to
make sure the brain gets copied and sent home,
or is guarded while being repaired.
On our end, we’re hoping that they took
a lot of safeguards to protect locals and
that they would not hold it against us if
we didn’t take that on faith.
Odds are, they get the concept of Stranger
Danger, it should be very common for any critter
that clawed its way up Darwin’s Ladder,
and if they still opt to be hostile when they
find out, well, odds are good they aren’t
the sorts to take precautions with the safety
of unknown aliens in mind or the sorts you
would ever have a friendly relationship with
anyway.
We don’t know if aliens would have anything
like the same morality we do, and you can
make a pretty good argument that a strictly
Darwinian morality isn’t morality at all,
not more than Anarchy is a form of government.
Of course, there’s a lot of versions of
governance that take up the name anarchy,
like anarcho-capitalism or anarcho-socialism,
so it probably wouldn’t be surprising to
see official moral systems drawing on Darwinism
as their bedrock, and an ethical system need
not be perfectly logically consistent anyway.
In this case, this presumably is the idea
that nature itself has a built-in morality.
Now, that’s not new, it's just that, when
we discuss natural rights and fundamental
good or evil, historically, everyone took
for a given that there was an underlying divine
good and evil and the word ‘nature’ did
not imply random chaos.
Rather, nature was the opposite of chaos and
anyone using the term prior to maybe the 19th
century was assuming a someone, or something,
had designed nature and either knew what was
fundamentally right and wrong, or actually
was itself what was fundamentally right.
Or, sometimes was perhaps the equal but opposite
personality or force, like Ahriman, or Yin
and Yang.
That these things were fundamental and true,
and that therefore, while there can be exceptions
or mitigations, things like murder, theft
or profanity were fundamentally wrong, not
locally wrong or dependent on whether humans
believed they were wrong or not.
This concept of natural rights, or a fundamental
right and wrong, or an ethical universe, is
why most legal systems of modern times might
allow a democratic vote on most things, but
not on if it’s okay to murder people or
take their stuff.
It is assumed that democracy does not actually
determine what is or is not ethical, just
that the will of the people is often as-good-a-means
of discovering what is right or wrong as some
philosopher-kings might be.
Incidentally, I’m compressing and oversimplifying
the topic, though hopefully without distorting
it, still, I’d encourage folks to read or
watch more on these topics, lots of stimulating
thoughts and debate.
I’m a physicist not a philosopher, so not
super-qualified to delve into it.
Now, why am I pounding on this point then?
Well, because, if you see a ship full of refugees
approaching your planet, it helps to have
an ethical reason not to shoot them down,
because there are a lot of logical reasons
to do so, especially on first glance, and
it really helps to know if there’s any chance
whatsoever that their ethical system matches
ours on some key points, and it matters a
lot if you believe there are fundamental rights
and wrongs.
We can argue that any civilization must have
some sort of rules against murder or theft
in order to operate, but if that’s just
their own internal regulation that keeps their
societal machine running, that they don’t
believe right and wrong are fundamental to
the Universe, then we have no expectation
they would feel it applied to us anymore than
thinking someone who follows the rules of
a board game, or sports game, lives those
same rules out when not playing.
There’s definitely room for Cognitive Dissonance
on things like this, almost everyone will
say they believe murder is truly wrong, and
they mean it too, at a gut and visceral level,
certain crimes are repugnant to us.
That law is written on every heart, either
by divine agency or evolutionary processes
for maintaining species’ survival, for highly
social animals.
For my part, I do believe in an Ethical Universe,
where things like murder are truly wrong,
but I can’t offer any scientific evidence
for or against that premise.
I considered the alternative and I do not
like the idea of being in a reality where
killing someone and taking their stuff is
okay, and that, if it isn’t, it's just some
convenient social convention.
And I emphasize that point because it follows
that I’m going to be in favor of letting
the alien refugees land, by default, but I’m
not an idiot either, so I’m not going to
blithely ignore all the ways that this can
go terribly wrong, even if it turns out that
they are ethical too.
And for the same reason, since I think there
is a fundamental right and wrong, I assume
aliens could know it too.
Thus, they might come to us for help and if
we turned them away for purely selfish reasons,
that might be a stain on our honor in the
eyes of many, even those coming after them.
Those pursuers might even pay us handsomely
in technology and territory, for us to turn
those fleeing them over, but still spit on
our name after they gave us our silver, because
the galaxy might have basic universal concepts
of good and bad.
Mind you, humans generally do believe right
and wrong are fundamental, but often don’t
apply concepts like murder or theft; to animals,
plants, or rocks either, by and large, or
make exceptions.
So even if you find out they have an ethics
system they are really devoted to, which requires
what we view as wonderfully ethical behavior,
it is a good idea to check if they believe
it includes us before inviting them to land.
We’re also permitted some legitimate paranoia
here, in the context of our first encounter
with aliens being, one crashing onto our planet.
It’s fair to ask what scenario produced
them landing without saying anything, because
local communications via radio is pretty low
energy and pretty low mass in terms of the
device, and very simple, so there’s no real
plausible situation there shouldn’t be a
backup or two, or an automated beacon.
And the episode may draw on science fiction
for inspiration, but we’re talking about
reality here, your backup, and backup’s
backup, are not likely to fail very often.
That would imply sabotage, and for that matter
we generally assume interstellar starships
aren’t designed for landing on planets,
or successfully crashing on them either, especially
when critically damaged, which is implied
if all their comms are down and have been
during their long approach to the planet from
deep space.
Otherwise, they should have plenty of attention
and time to spare to notice the comms were
down, and fix them.
It would be a horrible thing if someone got
killed because their pod’s communicator
failed, and its backup failed, and its backup-backup
failed, but the odds of that happening just
seem so small, and it’s not an academic
situation, it’s the possible fate of a civilization.
On the freak chance that someone was driving
on a road with streetlights while I was walking
across it at night with my reflective belt
and little blinking light I have, and all
three failed at once, I’m not going to hold
it against them that they ran me over and
neither would any just civilization.
I think that covers what to do if someone
just shows up, and without communicating with
us before landing, but let’s contemplate
some scenarios where we know more and let’s
start with an opening message.
It as a follows:
Greetings, humans of Earth.
This message is coming to you from our spaceship,
now approaching Earth.
We are the Chell, and are a group of aliens
that came up on the losing side of a civil
war, and have fled to Earth, hoping you would
help us and give us sanctuary.
We come in friendship and will gladly share
our knowledge with you.
May we land?
So, we got that message and we know they know
our language well enough to formulate that
message, but then we’ve been broadcasting
radio waves for a century now, and whether
their ship had to obey light speed or came
in using some sort of warp, they should have
had plenty of time to soak up those signals
and run them through computers and get some
sort of understanding of our basic, most-dominant
languages.
This does not necessarily mean they’ve really
done their homework, and seen all our alien
invasions films and sci-fi, to understand
our initial concerns.
The Chell may be moving at FTL speeds and
their computer barely had time to crack the
signals, or, they got them from some file
called “Earth Languages” on Galactopedia,
that someone compiles from more thorough research
done by unmanned probes.
These are refugees, fleeing to possible safety,
so they may be akin to someone running toward
a border or embassy, with a copy of a foreign
language phrasebook in hand, trying to learn
the customs as they ran.
Even in a non-FTL setting, if Chell are refugees,
then there’s a good chance everyone on board
is stuffed into freezer tanks, or databases,
except the bare minimum needed to keep the
ship running.
They may not have a lot of free time and talent
for watching human B-films from the 1950s
and 60s being broadcast on TV in the 80s or
90s, showing how humans perceive aliens.
What do we know from this message they have
sent?
There’s an awful lot we could make some
good educated guesses on, as we’ve looked
at in other episodes on alien behaviors and
signals, but, we know one key thing: There
*is* alien life out there, and it isn’t
a single unified agency.
It is statistically improbable that the only
other alien civilization out there in the
galaxy just happened to have a civil war in
which an alien refugee ship leaves and comes
here to us, unless there are tons of other
civilizations out there.
Possibly with a common ancestor, there might
be a million alien empires in the galaxy,
who could all trace their lineage back to
one homeworld, and we have no reason to think
they view us as less than their neighbors.
The implication of a colonized galaxy with
us in it, is that, the default worldview,
or galaxy view, isn’t casual genocide of
other intelligent lifeforms or ecosystems.
Combine that with sudden proof aliens exist,
and we can breathe a sigh of relief knowing
that, brutal utilitarianism mixed with xenophobia,
is not the default condition of the Universe.
That message tells us that these aliens, the
Chell, expect us to at least contemplate their
request.
Maybe they’re laughing up their sleeves
because they are actually brutal pirates,
waiting to land and be embraced as friends,
before firing on us and enslaving us.
But, of course, one would wonder why they
need slaves, instead of robots, and why nobody
ever came by before.
Our peaceful existence here tends to imply
that either: no aliens with the ability to
travel here; exist nearby us, which I tend
to assume is the case, or that they have been
aware of us and perhaps even been observing
us for a long time and left us be.
The approaching ship implies option two, which
implies that, whatever their intent toward
us is, the galactic norm for the past millions
of years is not to wipe out primitive planets,
or enslave them.
They might be tricksters or sincere, and if
sincere, they might unknowingly be exposing
us to harm, or they might be indifferent to
it; or just too desperate to care.
The impression with fleeing refugees is that,
the place you’re fleeing to offers a chance
of safety, and a lot of times, those fleeing
are not really stopping to philosophize on
if they represent a danger or burden to the
place they are going.
To be fair, if you’re fleeing a tyrannical
empire, bent on conquering all, the place
that takes you in is just getting a forewarning
and a new ally against the nominal bad guys,
who probably do not need a genuine excuse
for declaring another war.
However, that’s not likely to be the case
on the galactic stage, based on our prior
reasoning, and it would not seem likely then,
that taking in a ship of refugees itself would
be viewed as giving someone a casus belli,
or case for belligerence.
An act of war.
Obviously, step 2 on our part, is to ask some
tough questions and be prepared to get some
absolute hogwash in reply.
If they were on the losing end of a civil
war, I figure that there’s at least a 50/50
chance that on the sliding scale of ethics,
the refugees’ side was on the dark side
of their opposition.
That doesn’t mean you don’t help them,
but there’s a good chance this surviving
ship either contains a bunch of cowardly deserters
or was carrying off the equivalent of the
royal family and its servants and treasure,
while their capitol, and citizens, burned.
Which hardly makes them evil, but also probably
isn’t the story they’re getting ready
to tell, especially as, in a non-FTL Universe,
they may have had centuries to whitewash their
past behavior.
That could also apply to their current behavior
too, I mean, a ship that left 300 years ago,
carrying the equivalent of war criminals and
their loyalists and slaves, might now be full
of their innocent, honorable, and noble descendants.
Same way around, the ship once populated by
the brave last defenders of a civilization,
carrying off their orphans and sages, might
have degenerated into a thug state of ‘might
makes right’, while living in the crammed
and resource-poor interior of a ship on a
mission that was launched without proper preparation.
They might be fleeing the law and a just law
at that, but hoping to turn over a new life,
and they might decide to construct an entirely
fake narrative of fleeing some race like the
Borg from Star Trek because they saw them
on our TV, and figured we’d buy that story.
So, we have to be asking them for some real
details on who they are and who they are running
from, and we have to assume that they are
not telling us the truth, or even necessarily
know the truth themselves.
But, one way or another, we still need the
truth, and we need to be asking ‘what do
you want?’, because the galaxy doesn’t
seem to be crammed to the gills with civilizations,
as we were discussing last week in Absent
Megastructures.
They may only be asking for some unused asteroid
in our solar system, to land on and use, as
opposed to some unused island on Earth or
bit of desert, or flat-out integration into
our civilization.
That asteroid seems a lot more reasonable
as an ask, but begs the question of why they
did not go to one around a minor nearby star
or in deep space?
Any longtime watcher of this show knows such
places are as likely to be a comfortable home
or refueling stopover for a high-tech community
as a planet is.
Unlike General Zod from Man of Steel, who
had a terraforming machine, and felt obliged
to use it on Earth instead of Mars or Venus,
we can assume that someone will point out
that, Earth itself is not really an optimal
place for them to be setting up a Version
2.0 on, and some perfectly good rock they
could smash up and build a cylinder habitat
out of, would be much more suitable, and they
could do the job both faster and better.
Of course, that would depend on scale.
Folks fleeing an interstellar empire or Kardashev-2
system, might be the ragged remains of something
once greater, but still number in the trillions
or even quadrillions, not a few thousand or
maybe a million, as we usually see with this
sort of scenario in sci-fi.
We contemplated that notion in our Extragalactic
Sanctuaries episode where the nominal rebel
stronghold was 10 million star systems, each
composed of dyson swarms.
At that point, it’s sort of like someone
knocking on your door and asking for sanctuary
for himself, and upon getting the yes, you
find him waving in a few dozen people to cram
into your house, or a few quintillion.
But, whether it’s a planet, an asteroid
or a minor moon, the question becomes why
they came here rather than, say, Epsilon Eridani
or Alpha Centauri, or, as in that episode,
the Omega Centauri Cluster.
Of course, maybe they are aiming there and
they feel they have to ask for our blessing
or at least tacit permission to use that star
system.
Alternatively, they might be coming to us
specifically for safety.
Now, given that we don’t have any giant
space guns, there’s a short list of reasons
why we might provide safety.
First, they might think that, if they give
us a nice sob story and a ton of advanced
technology, we would be willing and able to
build and use giant space guns on their behalf.
And again, the context of today is unknown
aliens showing up at our door while we’re
still pretty primitive, everything changes
if we’ve got tons of interstellar colonies
and whole armadas of ships ourselves, plus
knowledge of the various aliens and their
empires.
It gets much more analogous to modern situations
then.
In such a case where they show up and offer
us the technology for guns and ask for our
aid using them, they may even want to talk
us into fighting for their cause to reclaim
their homeworld or whatever.
But why not just use robots or even clones
or something?
It would seem like even a fairly unsophisticated
self-replicator could do the 30-something
generations of doubling needed to match the
human population in less than the several
decades of time it takes to travel here, as
opposed to some system nearer to them, and
presumably, they don’t need to be paid and
can get their work done more predictably and
productively; same for weapons of war, combat
drones, and so on.
I am having problems seeing why they would
view Earth itself as being of any special
value, anymore than a classic alien invader.
We’ll be looking at the Dumbest Alien Invasions
in this month’s sci-fi Sunday episode, and
that will include some potential motives,
so, for now, we’ll just leave it at saying
that alien refugees themselves have no obvious
motivation to want Earth.
It’s not a great source of raw materials,
nor of labor or war-fighting allies, currently.
Its unique native biology is probably valuable
but not in any obvious way to aliens fleeing
an enemy, and those fleeing an enemy presumably
don’t pause to engage in casual genocide
of primitive worlds either.
That’s the first rule of warfare after all,
when running from an enemy, don’t go out
of your way to make new ones.
Such being the case, my best guess would be
that they need to fall under our official
umbrella.
In a big semi-civilized galaxy, you could
have a lot of factions that don’t casually
invade even a primitive world’s space, because
doing so would be viewed negatively by other
powers.
It wouldn’t be too unlike someone fleeing
the US to some minor island nation with a
population of a couple thousand.
Obviously, even the smallest ocean-going naval
vessel is packing enough people and ordinance
to take that person by force or even that
whole island.
There are pretty good odds that an order to
invade is going to have the captain radio
back, asking if we’re drunk or insane, and
perhaps even refusing on moral grounds, blind
obedience in militaries is much more common
in fiction than reality.
But, such a command wouldn’t likely be issued
because there are serious consequences to
that action, and they’re likely to outweigh
the apparent benefit, at a political and diplomatic
level.
In that context it would seem like the most
obvious reason to come here would be to live
under a sanctuary umbrella and of course,
sanctuary requires permission.
In this context though it feels uncomfortably
like a vampire needing to knock on your door
and get invited in, and indeed asking for
sanctuary might be one of those loopholes
for getting your foot in the door and taking
a place over without having to be officially
declared an invader.
You’re a guest who was granted citizenship
and can now influence the planet like any
other.
Now, as a caveat to the First Rule of Warfare,
not making more enemies while fleeing one,
it is only fair to mention that this implies
that an attack would actually matter.
In Frank Herbert’s classic: Dune, both the
fifth and sixth books are set 5000 years after
the original trilogy, and after the original
empire, the Old Million as it is called, has
come to be dwarfed by an unknowable number
of distant colonies created in a period known
as the Scattering.
It’s implied that there are vast empires
dwarfing these old million worlds that have
grown out there in the Universe, and at the
start of events, many are coming home as refugees
and traders, often bearing new technologies.
Many are fleeing a group called the Honored
Matres, who are decidedly militant, but still
themselves seek non-violent conquest options
first, but they don’t mind picking a fight,
because all the great powers of the Old Million
are frankly rather tiny compared to the forces
they have, plus they’re arrogant and touchy.
It turns out that they themselves are on the
run from some unknown greater enemy that’s
thrashed them, and they’re hoping humanity’s
old empire, under the Atreides, has some super
weapons or designs hidden there.
No spoilers here, but it’s hard to imagine
that Earth would house a superweapon, unless
we had some ancient precursor civilization
here, and we see that in the Stargate SG-1
series, where Earth was actually the home
for a human precursor civilization that left
some mighty big guns hanging-out in Antarctica.
And it is worth noting that, if the galaxy
is full of alien life, and yet Earth is getting
left alone, as seems the case, then it is
just as likely that Earth holds some special
significance; as it is likely that primitive
worlds like Earth just get left alone and
everyone is good about obeying that rule.
Maybe 70 million years ago, dinosaurs ruled
the Earth and colonized the galaxy from here,
and while their empire eventually fell, everyone
is terrified of setting off all the massive
automated defenses around Earth.
That’s not an asteroid belt, it’s ten
million orbital weapons systems gathering
dust.
One last note on realism to finish up the
day: Let’s say a ship was coming.
Who gets to talk to them and make this decision
about granting refuge?
What if some countries say no?
What if one with nukes threatens to use them
if we permit a landing?
What if most nations say no but one says “Sure,
come here”, do we just let that go?
For that matter, is anyone really going to
care what the UN says in a case like that?
It’s not exactly considered a bastion of
ethics or authority these days by many.
Now, by default, if they flat-out set down
in some country, without conversation, then,
under ordinary circumstances, that country
probably has jurisdiction, but I don’t think
it would be long before other countries demanded
a role in things.
The wedge to get in would probably be three-sided:
concerns about some nation getting a ridiculous
advantage in technology from having access
to the aliens and their ship, the obvious
fear of the huge, shared dangers, and deserving
to have transparency about what is happening
and a say in what happens, and demands to
make sure those aliens were not being exploited
or lied to.
Now, I raise that last one more as a last
thought for us to consider, rather than thinking
it would be of equal weight to the other two.
Nations might use fear of alien exploitation
to get a foot in the door, but even nowadays,
I don’t think that would be anyone’s chief
concern.
Nonetheless, there is definitely a history
of refugees, after enduring hardship to get
to apparent safety, still facing great hardship
on their arrival, being preyed on by their
host and their own less-ethical members.
I like to think we’ve gotten better about
that as our civilization has aged, even if
there’s still a lot of room to grow, and
if it’s part of our history and growth,
maybe it’s been part of most alien civilizations
as well.
If that’s the case, maybe if the worst ever
happened to us, someone might give us refuge
too, or even come to our aid.
I don’t think the right question to be asking
a refugee before offering help is, what have
they done to deserve our help?
but it’s probably not a bad idea for a civilization
to ask itself what it has done to deserve
help, should it ever need it, and if maybe
plotting a course to salvation should include
some internal journeys, not just those of
space and time.
So between writing this episode and getting
the video ready I had occasion to watch the
scifi classic TV show Babylon 5 where they
tried to show realistic alien environmental
conditions on board their space station and
embassy and I realized one thing I didn’t
get a chance to cover today is what sort of
efforts we might need to construct and maintain
an actual alien environment for refugees or
visitors here on Earth or in orbit.
So I thought we would do an Extended Edition
looking at that topic over on Nebula, our
streaming service.
Alien environments are a staple of science
fiction but they are something that science
is very interested in too and our newer telescopes
are giving us a first glimpse of what sort
of worlds might be common and what they might
be like, and there’s a great video on that
topic, Space Phenomena’s “Alien Planets”
over on Curiositystream that explores options
like life on a planet around a Red Dwarf star,
the most common kind in the Universe.
Speaking of extended editions of our show
though, we do an audio only version of this
show every week, with and without music, and
we also do an ad and sponsor free version
of the videos that we put up on Nebula, our
streaming service, and now we are going to
add our podcast up there ad and sponsor free
on Nebula too, and like all our episodes they
will come out on Nebula a few days early.
We also often have extended editions of our
episodes on Nebula and again we’ll be having
one for today’s episode to discuss alien
environmental enclosures, which will be available
as video and audio-only, with and without
music accompanying.
Now if you didn’t know, Nebula is our streaming
service where you can catch all those extended
editions of our show, some Nebula Exclusives
like Planets vs Megastructures and the Coexistence
with Alien series, and now our audio-only
version of the show ad-free.
And all our new episodes, video or audio,
come out there a couple days early and without
ads or sponsors.
Nebula is also home to an ever-growing number
of content creators and is the largest creator-owned
streaming service out there, making it a great
way to help support some of your favorite
channels while getting ad free content and
bonus material.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos on amazing topics like Alien Planets.
That lets us offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see the amazing content on Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just
use the link in the episode’s description.
So next week we will be talking about possible
doomsday technologies that might cause a civilization
to become refugees or even wipe them out entirely,
and we will explore such Technological Timebombs
as a possible Fermi Paradox Solution.
One example of that would be a technology
that literally wipes your civilization out
backwards in time, and we will be exploring
that and other dangerous and weaponized uses
of Time Travel in two weeks, and how those
function inside of various temporal models
like alternate timelines.
Before that though, we have another Alien
Civilizations episode coming up next weekend
for our monthly Scifi Sunday episode, Dumbest
Alien Invasions, where we’ll examine the
weirdest attempts and motives in fiction to
invade Earth.
Then in three weeks we’ll ask what humanity’s
first space settlement will be like, and where
it will be: in orbit, on the Moon or Mars
or somewhere else.
Then we’ll close the month out with our
Livestream Q&A on Sunday August 28th at 4pm
Eastern time, where we take your questions
from the chat and answer them live.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
