Welcome. This video we'll be covering
various types of megastructures and
artificial worlds and constructs which
you'll be familiar with from science or
science fiction. We'll be covering
everything from NEO low horizon orbital
types which might have a dozen or so
people inside it. Up to things the size
of planets or even the size of solar
systems like a Dyson Sphere. For that
reason we have an ad-hoc classification
system which we will be using that roughly
NEO stellar classifications. We'll go
over that in just a moment. First though let me
add a quick thank you and plug for Steve Bowers who provided the majority of the
images will be using here and the
Orion's Arm project. Orion's Arm is a
shared sci-fi setting that is also a
wonderful resource for looking into
a lot of the other megastructures in detail
and many of the sci-fi subjects which
are covered in the encyclopedia
Galactica.
They also have one of the most comprehensive collections of links for
writers and sci-fi fans in terms of tools
and maps that you can use for your own
interests.
So that's a site definitely worth
checking out - orionsarm.com.
So let's go ahead and move into our
classification system. First type is types.
We have artificial gravity,
situations where it's not applicable,
rotational gravity, spherical or classical
gravity and zero or microgravity.
Where artificial gravity is concerned this is the situation you're most familiar with from
science fiction films that there is simply
no way to produce films in zero gravity
or microgravity so in TV and film they
typically just have artificial gravity of some sort.
We won't be using too many examples of
that but it is worth noting as a class
that we'll see a few of.
We also have a lot of situations where it simply won't apply.
Like the Lofstrom Launch Loop. The
gravity that's there is really not
related to the object or there's simply
no reason why we care about the gravity there,
like a giant space gun or railgun.
It has nothing to do with the purpose of the object.
The one we'll spend the most
time on is rotational gravity.
This is a spin gravity case where the
experience of gravity is felt by the
fact that you're being pinned to the floor by centrifugal forces.
We have an awful lot of examples of that
we'll be going over one at a time but
it probably makes up the bulk of all
cases. We are also going to try to avoid
getting too math heavy but there is an
equation that's relevant for rotating
habitats that matters. The acceleration
which for earth gravity be 9.8 meters per
second squared that you would want to
have to simulate gravity requires that
you spin the station at a given velocity
based on its radius and that's the
velocity squared divided by the radius. Our next type is spherical or classic gravity
this won't always be just a planet or an
asteroid but it is the most well-known
example this is straight real gravity
that you're experiencing.
So this does not necessarily have to be
caused by a classic planet. There are a
number of situations you can create
where you would have gravity from mass
but the planet is not the same size as
Earth or might not have a terrestrial natural origin.
These come in as nearly as
many shapes and sizes as the ring
spinning habitats do and we'll be
looking at quite a few of these.
Then our last category which is simply zero gravity
or microgravity. These are circumstances
where the habitat, the space station or
the artificial world just does not have
any significant amount of gravity felt
by the people inside.
Besides the space station you could have
habitats full of a large inflated balls full of air.
Our next category that we'll
be looking at ... classification system is size.
These things again can range
from the size of the space station all
the way up to things as big as the
solar system. So we have a set order of
magnitude scale to look at this.
We'll give a number N where N is ten to the nth power in terms of its width in meters.
So N equals 1 would be 10 meters
N equals 2 would be 100 meters N
equals 3 will be 1000 meters
N equals 6 would be a million meters and
so on. So type and size will be combined as follows:
Z1 would be a zero gravity
environment about 10 meters across like
the space station a large rotating
habitats several miles long would be a
R4 something the size of the earth
and almost all of the planets you
normally associated as being a planet
that you could live on would be a S7 indicating a
spehrical gravity and is about ten thousand kilometers or 10 million meters
across and then an A11 would be
something with artificial gravity about
the size of Earth's orbit around the Sun
like a Dyson Sphere
our last category is habitability now for
all purposes we're just going to say
that one hectare which is a 100-meter
x 100-meter area about the size of a
acre is about how much space you need
for one person to grow all their food and
have some forested garden area
it's a very approximate figure but
Earth has about 14 billion hectares of land including unusable stuff like deserts and
polar regions and about 7 billion people
or roughly ten to the tenth power this
conveniently gives us the roman numeral
X for 10 and we use that same ten to the nth
system so X would be what it would be
for earth and other planets and s7x
would be your typical planet that was
fully populated this shots our handy
guide and we'll be using this
classification only very approximately
because a hunter-gatherer civilization
for instance would be about too lower on
the chart they don't need one hectare per
person they need around a hundred
alternatively with very intensive
hydroponics or aeroponics and
artificial lighting you can easily get a
hundred people fed off of one hectare
and you could have sci-fi settings for
instance or futures of humanity where
you don't even eat food you you run on
electricity so it's an approximate scale
and X conveniently is about the
population of a planet we only be using
this for when you'd expect that the
place in question to be mostly
self-sufficient as a kind of artificial
planet even when they're not terribly
huge themselves in a lot of situations
the habitability index just doesn't
apply for those where it does the
classification will look a lot like this
Z1i or Z1 one would be the space station
it's got very few people on it the R4v
or R4 five for example would be a situation
about 100,000 people S7x again being
earth would be an example of a place
that could handle some billions of
people and then the case for Dyson
Sphere its tens of billions of billions
of people who would live in that kind of
circumstance with the same space that
you would have on Earth
so since the artificial and not
applicable categories don't really have
any kind of specific shape and come in
so many different varieties we'll start
with the rotating gravity ones as
specific examples
it's also important to understand that
these things do not necessarily have to
appeal from the outside as a cylinder
when you're dealing with a ship or when
you're dealing with a space station they
are cylindrical in terms of parts that
have gravity they can have a non-rotating
shell outside them you can actually go
ahead and embed them right into an
asteroid for instance and the in thing
that comes up sometimes with this is
your hear people say let's hollow out
an asteroid and spin it you would never
actually do that the gravity that these
things under gets higher the further
you are from the axis of rotation most
asteroids are loosely held together
balls of gravel they have a very weak
surface gravity and you actually spun
the entire asteroid at speeds to produce
artificial gravity for humans they were
flying apart
nor do you need to spend them you just
need to make sure there was no few
metres of room between the actual
spinning object and some shell you've
constructed inside the asteroid the
other thing of note with these is that
you can only build them as wide in terms
of radius or diameter as something that
can actually handle that force on earth
would be able to handle it's like a
suspension bridge that's as long as the
circumference of the station many
materials just cannot handle you know
miles and miles long circumferences
Now let's actually get into all specific
examples
this is Von Braun's space station from
1952 one the original designs and one
that is pretty familiar looking it's not
a very large object it's less than a
hundred meters across and it's got
room for less than a hundred people on it
NASA did quite a few of these
kind of mockups in late fifties and early
sixties and this is a hexagonal rotating
one, designed to be inflated from
the early sixties it wasn't very long before
people started envisioning
much larger places places where people
would actually live as opposed to tight
confined spaces you'd find at a place of
business a post in the Antarctic that
sort of thing
one of the first of these is the 'Stanford Torus'
there's also the 'Bernal Sphere' which
is another one from that era and these
are designed of the assumption that you're
using steel to make them these are
examples will generally known as 'O'Neill
Cylinders' named for John O'Neill and
work on an assumption that you're
powering these things with the light of
the local sun that they're some
kilometers across or miles across and
that they could be home to many
thousands tens of thousands of hundreds
of thousands of people
one example is a lot of people be
familiar with from science fiction is
the Babylon 5 space station and TV show
these are work on the assumption you
just cannot build a space station more
than about 10 kilometers in diameter
before it's going to start ripping itself
apart from normal metals
here's another example from the city of Enoch project you can check out their
facebook page at this point we have to
go into objects that are much bigger
that can only be built out of things
that could not be conceived of until the
mid nineties when we discovered carbon
nanotubes and graphene these are
substance you put a lot about and what
let us think about ideas like space
elevators at this point in time
you're no longer discussing things that
a few thousand people can live on
something the size of a city maybe a
metropolis you're looking at things
that are size of large countries
there's a picture of Great Britain. It is
actually to scale there. Great Britain is
about a thousand kilometers from
top to bottom this thing is about 500
kilometers wide
it's about 2,000 kilometers in diameter
so it is actually pretty close to the
size of the eastern united states in
terms of total land area but
the 'Bishop Ring' is just saw the tip of
the iceberg of what you can do with
graphene and nanotubes the 'McKendree Cylinder' is the next biggest one and
it's actually several thousand
kilometers long and as wide as the
'Bishop Ring' here you have an object
that's capable of housing potentially
nearly a planetary population that have
the i the ix the 9
population for habitability you could fit
a billion people on this thing quite
comfortably it's typically again several
thousand kilometers long
the thing is enormous and you can put
multiple levels in there as well
we typically picture these just having that
one level open sky but they could be
many many levels high and in this
picture for instance that is not a
close-up of the 'McKendree Cylinder'
relative to a planet that's actually
about the scale of a 'McKendree Cylinder' again
its many thousands of kilometers long
it does not necessarily need to have
those light absorption discs by the way
that's just the assumption that you
don't have some power source that could
let you simulate sunlight now no matter
what you do there are certain
limitations on how big you can make
these things using classic materials as
we said but you can still keep
scaling up as one solid object an example
of that is a 'Rungworld' where each of those little
rungs on that apparent ladder going around
a circle could be something size of an 'O'Neill Cylinder' or a 'McKendree Cylinder' so that
thing could be the size of several
planets or can wrap around an entire star
One orbital habitat that's of special note
is the 'Banks Orbital' named for Ian M Banks
the late and great author of the
cultural series this is an orbital that
specifically the necessary radius to
produce Earth like gravity and have a day length
brought by its own natural sun that it's in orbit around that is exactly the same as a day on there
and for Earth that's several million kilometers
across these things are typically the
size of a couple hundred Earths when they
are set up that way you can make them a lot thicker though
but that's always
going to be unique size for a given day
length and a given gravity
there's only going to be one exact size
that can make that configuration
next we have a very popular one the Ringworld first again popularized by Larry Niven
in the book titled that this is an
orbital habitat that is placed around a
star typically at the distance from it
that Earth is and it's going to be
about the size of a couple of million Earths
less well-known but from the same author
is a 'Topopolis' or a 'Spaghetti World' this
is a thin rotating habitat that's simply
very very long you can wrap it around
a star several times and so long as
it's much longer than it is wide
it has no problem spinning even when you
call it around just like a rope so you
can spin around a star and these can be
pretty much any length you want something
like the 'Rungworld' or the 'Topopolis' example
is a Polyhedral habitat which is
sometimes called 'Bucky Habitat' these can
be very very large wrapped around entire
stars but they are essentially a long
connection of cylinder habitats whether
they're McKendree sized objects or the
'O'Neill Cylinder' type objects and again
Mckendree objects are usually thousand
kilometers long whereas only $PERCENT or
so on doors are usually in the tens of
kilometers law a movie on to the next
class vehicle gravity I want to talk
about hybrid example a lot of times when
you're walking with a moon base or
emulsion base from someplace with a
gravity exists and is significant but
isn't what you want you to be stuck with
that in fiction or examples but you
don't actually have to be you can
combine the rotational gravity and
spherical gravity or classic gravity
much like a washing machine when you put
water it will spin and former parabola
you can arrange to have the sides of
your habitat slope like that so that you
spend the habitat it will combine the
gravity that's caused by the local man
and by spinning to produce a gravity
equal to that of off and if you're on a
vacuum environment like the moon there's
no real reason why you wouldn't do that
a bit of a hassle little energy
intensive but not actually all that bad
on next major category is feel gravity
classic gravity
now this is a much build category that
you initially think we're not just
talking about large moons classic
planets and we're also including shell
wards examples of this would be where
you construct the board around large
object like a black hole which could be
smaller than a planet or larger because
it's not official black hole around the
gas giant or even just compressed gas
this isn't strictly limited to
super-powerful material was that allow
you to make a rigid shell the size of
multiple planets this requires though
that you use something called active
support the easiest way to think of
active support would be a garden hose
that was connected to a pump at both
ends once you turn the pump on the holes
were immediately spring into a sachal
even do this with magnetically propelled
small particles moving mass stream so
that you can create widget objects in a
circular form that are just huge and
size we call this active support because
no matter how efficient you make this
system there's going to be some energy
last so you're going to have to
constantly be adding power and assistant
hold your plan together all that a
hoarder polish so it doesn't fall
together and this can be done
it's probably scientifically possible
it's a little bit ahead of us right now
because it's just huge and energy
consumptive. But it is one alternative to
space elevators. You could make one of
these rings that was hovering just above
the atmosphere of the planet and just
connect shorter teth*#!alls a few miles I to it
another example of natural gravity would
be a shell world in this case a
matryoshka doll type situation - where
it's just layer after layer of
contention of concentric spheres around
each other
you have to artificially light those and
you have large pillars that helped
hold up the sky and a very atlas like
example. Here each layer either has a
slightly higher gravity to get for them
out or if you space them out far enough
you can keep it at the same stable
gravity by just having a different
distance to each layer. You want to take a moment to avoid confusing this with a
matryoshka brain which is another type
of contract will discuss later on your
hear this term a lot more often than the
 'Shell World' for example come back to that
later on. Another example would be a 'Hoop World' or 'Torus World' or 'Donut World'.  Call it what you want.
In this example you have something
knows about 10 times the size of Earth
so long as the hoops diameter is much
wider than that of the actual thing
itself
you're going to have perfectly normal
gravity on this office our next category
of microgravity habitats these can come
in almost any type of sale no such as
the space station with Space Shuttle all
the way up to self-contained wards
general just full of fail this another
artificial worldthat was popularized by
Larry Nevin - him as well as Dr. Freeman
Dyson and Paul Borch were some of the
guys who came up with almost all these
ideas. Very impressive! The 'Smoke Ring'
example - he actually has a large are
loosely held together atmosphere around
another star in another large donut
shape but there's also self-contained
varieties such as the 'Edersphere' where there is advertising on the
outside of it but inside here you have a
low-gravity environment where you can
breathe and where it's a warm
temperature but you'd have to have
artificial lighting and again it's zero
gravity.  Some of our balls are more
popular examples like 'Disc Worlds'. Here's an example one that's a couple thousand
kilometers across this where you live on
a flat off one side or both sides then
big enough they could have their own
gravity but we usually think this is
something with artificial gravity
probably the best-known fictional
example of this is the discord by Terry
Pratchett great series
a fantasy parody novels as well as the
'Alderson Disc'. 
Now normally 'Alderson
Disc' is not considered a really great
one to use.
It is just very large, it's surrounds an entire star. But it's
pretty much always in a constant
perpetual haze of twilight and does not
get a lot of light.
You can get around this. 
And the way that you would usually
do this, is you would  float mirrors over your star that will set up two
day and night cycle. This is where we get
into another one of those concepts will
be using a little later on:
A 'Statite'. That's short for a static
satellite. This is something that much
like a solar sail is pushed on by
sunlight nor to move. In this case though
it's hung exactly at the distance where
the solar pressure and the gravity equal
out for that object so that does not
fall into the Sun or get further away.
With statites you can float mirrors over the Sun. One big one or hundreds of little
tiny ones. 
We are now going to move on the
class are called 'Stellar Engines' and
the classic example this is a 'Dyson
Sphere' - again a Dyson Sphere is a couple
billion times bigger than Earth in terms
of land survace. Although a real one
would probably be a little bit further
out from the Sun than earth is. Bbecause of
that day night cycle, where you might
have some static mirrors around actually
mimic that, but it has two sides one dark
one light if you only get daylight the
entire time as far away as earth is from
the Sun you're going to melt pretty
quickly. You need to be a little bit further out than that. Fundamentally, a
'Dyson Sphere' is just not really a stable
object and of itself it can even drift
into its own star and needs artificial
gravity so we usually talk about a 'Dyson
Swarm' instead. This is identical to a
'Dyson Sphere' except it's composed of
endless millions and billions even
trillions of rotating habitats or
'Statites'.
The other aspect of a 'Dyson Swarm' is it
doesn't have to be complete, and you can
build up in stages. So you could have a
'Dyson Swarm' that only would say one
percent coverage or absorption light and
build that out of local materials a lot
easier than you can an actual 'Dyson
Sphere' where you're probably not going
to have enough your matter to make good
thick shells. 'Dyson Swarms' are also a
little bit unstable. So we will also occasionally talk about a 'Jenkins Swarm'
which is a sort of a very large donut around a star - of various swarm objects
rotating bodies or Chapel. These don't
follow circular orbits though they
follow a slightly elliptical path that
brings them a little bit closer and further
away from the Sun and you'd probably use
that to simulate your seasons. We
mentioned the 'Matryoshka Brain' earlier. This is an object that is basically a 'Dyson
Sphere',  'Dyson Swarm'.
Instead of it
being for people to live on
you're using all their collective power
to run a single massive supercomputer.
Where a 'Dyson Sphere' almost
incomprehensible huge in terms of how
many people it can support,  a 'Matryoshka Brain' is almost incomprehensive huge
- even more so in terms of how many
calculations it can perform. Especially cuz
it's assumed to be done by computer much
more advanced in terms of micro sizing
than our current ones are. You'd expect an object like this - if it was treated
as a human mind - to be one that was
trillions of trillions of trillions of
times faster than a human.
The next category
of 'Stellar Engines' are the ones designed
to remove mass from a star. A star
lifting swarm or start lifting ring and
this is basically how you go about
killing a star but it isn't really
weaponizeable. This requires a lot of
infrastructure to do. Basically it relies
around using the magnetic field that a
star has and setting up a ring around it
or swarm around it that is going in the
opposite direction to basically rip
matter off and cause it to emit at the
northern and southern poles of the
planet. The magnetic field is very
intense and by by setting up a ring
around it that spins and is a superconducting
magnet, you can turn off gigatonnes of
matter from that star - potentially
reducing it down to nothing. Eventually
big stars are much brighter and live a lot
less time. They also burn a much
smaller percentage of the hydrogen so it's
reasonable to say that you might take a
larger star than a yellow sun and
strip matter away from it, so that lives
longer. Or even a Yellow Sun to strip it
down to be a red dwarf. Which will live for
many hundreds of billions or trillions
of years and use up almost all their
hydrogen so they could be seen as much
longer lasting and  more efficient engines. Now if you
actually want to move a stall or solar
system you have what's called the
'Shkadov Thruster' this is basically a half mirror around a star and you often have
a lot closer to the star than you would
have a 'Dyson Spere' because you just
need to make sure it's not so close it
doesn't melt this would be a 'Statite' or
swarm of 'Statites'.
The lights pushes on it from one direction and it pushes it back in
the opposite direction. the light from
the star goes out in one general
direction and this causes a force to be
pushed on the mirror and the star and the
entire solar system slowly accelerating
up to high speeds it takes millions of
years to move any significant distance
billions of years to move in our
galactic scale but this does actually
work just fine
it should be noted that the rate at
which accelerates is related to the
luminosity and mass the star. The brighter it 
is the faster it moves. The heavier it is, the
the slower it moves. 
But stars actually raise
their luminosity or how bright they are
much faster than their mass. In an order of
about the cube or fourth power.
So a very bright star - such as one that could
go supernova - is an ideal candidate to
hit with a 'Shkadov Thruster' because you can
move it very quickly.
Alternatively a red dwarf will take a very
long time to accelerate up this way
those are your 'Stellar Engines'. Now
that's not the absolute end of things
there are many contructs have been
thought through even bigger on the
galactic scale the only one I'm going to
take a moment to mention is a one of the
examples #!% given. Where you take a
galactic size black hole. We're talking
about black hole of many millions of
stars of solar masses like the kind you
find the center of the galaxy and you
build a shell around that. Like the super
Mondane
'Shell Worlds' be discussed and then you put
another shell around that and another
shell amount that's and another shell
around that obviously these have to be
actively supported you can put in so
many layers that you're not just talking
about a 'Dyson Sphere' hear you talk about
something that's almost as big to a
'Dyson Sphere' as a 'Dyson Sphere' is to
the earth and you can actually live
inside this thing! You could have endless
layers of 'Shell Worlds' of earths. Trillions
of earths in area to live on. 
what's interesting is, that at the lowest
levels, time is actually running slower
from the distortion effect. Though
there's no title for sustaining your
part then is the highest level so at the
lower levels time runs slowly at the
higher levels that runs the normal time
and this is, at the best of my knowledge, the
biggest  construction could ever
make that would have human habitability
by normal people
I'm not only posturing it, not just because
it's a so immensely huge compared to a
'Dyson Sphere', but because it's by the
center of the galaxy and seems like
would be an amazingly cool capital for
galactic empire!
So that's we're going to
go ahead and finish off.  There's a lot of
 megastructures we did not even touch
on. I would certainly encourage you to
research more of those. But these are
almost the general ones that you'd expect
to ever really see - they are used multiple times
in different settings or in science
in general. Anyway I hope you've enjoyed
this and thanks for watching
