Today’s episode is the first of a three
part series we are going to do looking at
what life might be like on colonies or colonial
spaceships.
We normally focus so much on the technology
and mechanics of extraterrestrial colonies
or ships that we mostly ignore what day-to-day
life would be like and it seemed time to rectify
that a bit.
           Now there are a few
reasons we have avoided this in the past.
First, colony life is going to vary a lot
on what technology is available, you don’t
need to have people growing food if you have
robots who can do all the work for instance.
Second, we don’t know what the people will
be like, because it is entirely possible,
even likely, that what passes for human on
colonies would be a cyborg or genetically
tweaked human or even an outright digital
person.
And third, we don’t know how they’d behave
because we don’t their motivations.
           If we are looking at
day-to-day life and how the place governs
itself, that will depend a lot on why those
colonists decided to become colonists in the
first place.
Traditionally it takes a lot of motivation
to get people to up and leave their life behind
but what that motive is can be a lot different
for each colony and each individual.
We are going to try to set the stage for better
considering what colony life would actually
be like, and that means we will be spending
a fair amount of time, especially in this
first episode, still talking about a lot of
the mechanics.
Fortunately, we have discussed a lot of those
in the past too so I will occasionally reference
those episodes to save time.
         
    When it comes to asking why we would
colonize other places, what our motives will
be, and how colonists might govern themselves,
we will draw on some historical examples for
insights.
However we also want to avoid letting ourselves
be trapped in a box by history.
While I can empathize with King Solomon’s
world-weary assertion that there is nothing
new under the sun, I don’t think anyone
alive today can take that comment as true
at face value.
There are just too many changes to our civilization
in terms of technology, culture, and day-to-day
life to think we can treat any historic event
as a strong guide to future events.
So while we will draw on a lot of historical
examples of previous colonies in this and
the follow-up episodes, we will also try to
look for parallels in modern times and take
both with a sizable grain of salt.
To truly explore this topic there are some
questions we need to ask ourselves about any
given colony and any given colonist.
    Here are some of the most important
questions we should be thinking about for
the colony itself:
1.
What is its purpose?
2.
Who is founding it, and why?
3.
Where is it, relative to the Earth and Sun?
4.
How big is the object being settled?
5.
What are the object's characteristics?
    So what is it’s purpose?
Is it a scientific outpost?
Is it a money making one?
Mining for platinum or growing food or building
ships.
Is it a national extension?
Something fully backed and supported by a
country getting its footholds in space?
Maybe it is a religious or ideological one.
It could have more than one purpose too, and
almost certainly will have at least secondary
goals.
    That will depend a lot on who is founding
it and why.
If I’m part of religious denomination that
puts a lot of value on farming, I might decide
to found an agricultural colony.
So my motive is principally religious but
it is also presumably a money-making one focused
on exporting food.
Needless to say that is going to dominate
where I want to put it since you need sunlight
to grow food and you need people to buy that
food.
So where the colony is, relative to the Earth
and Sun, matters a lot.
Even if you’ve got cheap fusion to use instead
of sunlight.
It also will control the time lag on all communications,
which also means a longer response time for
any problem where you need expert help from
back home.
Also, the further out you are, the more isolated
your colony is, and the more expensive it
will be to set the colony up or to import
replacement components and consumables.
On the other hand if I’m from a religious
or ideological group that is very isolationist
and doesn’t want to be around bad influences,
the further and deeper out in space, the better.
We also need to know how big the object is.
Is it a planet?
A large moon?
And Asteroid or Comet?
This controls some of our ultimate ends for
that colony.
A martian Colony might want to take some steps
to accustom people to lower gravity, genetic
engineering perhaps, while ironically places
with lower gravity probably would not.
Mars has enough gravity to hold an atmosphere
too, and a roughly earth length day, so that
they might seriously consider full blown terraforming
of that planet.
Alternatively your average asteroid that is
only a few kilometers across, and even most
moons and comets, are better thought of as
an egg you plan to grow inside and eventually
hatch out of, into a colony far bigger than
that asteroid was when you started.
This will depend on what the other characteristics
of the object are: what it is made of.
Is it high in metals?
Is it high in organic elements?
Is it drifting by itself or in a large group
of other bodies, like a collection of moons?
Next we need to ask why any given colonist
would want to become a colonist.
If we want to know what life would be like
on one, that depends a lot on physical characteristics
of the colony, in terms of the resources it
has and the technology available.
It also depends on the motivations and goals
of the colonists.
Both as individuals, and as a group.
It is pretty normal for instance for a young
couple to become colonists and they may already
have children too.
Either way odds are one of them is more enthusiastic
about it then the other.
So you could easily end up with half of your
colonists there who are a bit lukewarm about
it.
That can change with time too, I can think
of any number of trips I made or events I
attended at the insistence of friends who
were very excited about it where I turned
out to have a great time, and sometimes they
felt disappointed afterwards.
In any given colony you should expect a broad
spectrum of motives, goals, and personalities,
depending on how strict your recruitment guidelines
are and how good you are at screening for
those desired traits, of course.
I also want to emphasize that when I say colony,
I mean a place where people plan to set up
shop for the long term and have families.
Now it might be a dedicated zero-growth place
that plans to begin at 1000 people and stay
that way till the end of time, or their idea
of family might differ a lot from our own,
like if they grew their new people in tanks
till adulthood, but I’d still call those
colonies.
The motives of the colony overall and individually
will control a lot of how it grows and functions.
One started by a group of anarchists and one
started as a marxist commune are going to
have very different priorities from each other
and won’t be like one meant to be a Catholic
colony.
I don’t want to oversimplify any of those
groups and their goals but the anarchist group
would probably want to emphasize individual
homes more than the commune in their first
construction, while the Catholics might want
their first building to be a large church
everyone could take their meals and sleep
in while homes were built.
Some folks might just be there to make money
and plan to leave, and that could include
a lot of senior colony personnel like the
doctor or lawyer or administrative specialist
who isn’t even interested in the goal of
the colony just doing their job there until
their contract expires or they get promoted
to a position elsewhere.
So the motives control why people are establishing
a colony and will tell us at least as much
about life on that colony as what technology
we have.
But there also certain categories of objects
for colonization we need to consider too.
When it comes to categorization there are
tons, but we have three major ones we need
to consider.
How big is the object being colonized?
How close is it to the Sun?
And how close is it to other objects?
Let’s discuss that last one first.
Things are very different if you’ve got
one rock all alone a billion miles from its
nearest neighbor as opposed to a small collection
of asteroids or moons all close enough you
could have a real time telephone conversation.
It also controls how self-sufficient you need
to be, since not only do communications travel
slower but trade will take longer too.
This would also cost more in terms of actual
cost and lost time.
You also might not want to pick a cluster
of asteroids even if the others were uninhabited
at the time.
A body 10 kilometers across has about the
same mass and resources as eight bodies half
as wide, 5 kilometers across, but it is probably
easier to make sure your colony has sole claim
on that one body than all eight and you might
not want neighbors.
    As to how big the object is, I’ve
decided to break everything into just six
sizes.
Less than a kilometer across, less than 10
kilometers across, less than a hundred, less
than a thousand, less than ten thousand, and
less than a hundred thousand.
And I’ll call those 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5
respectively.
We could imagine a category 6 but only Jupiter
itself would be that big, as would brown dwarfs,
and today we’re not interested in any of
our gas giants, except their moons, though
we may look at colonizing them directly in
the future.
Now this is a measure of diameter by order
of magnitude so it is a bit arbitrary but
in a raw sense each category is 10 times wider
but also a thousand time more massive than
the last, and so could presumably support
a thousand times the population.
    Now I also picked these to highlight
the importance of gravity.
Almost every celestial object you probably
know the name of is category 4 or 5.
Earth, Venus, and all the Gas Giants except
Jupiter are fives.
These are also the only places you could expect
to find the gravity comfortable and not need
to worry about health issues.
They also have no problem holding an atmosphere.
    When you get down to category 4 though,
these are the objects that are where classic
terraforming is probably possible but will
take a lot of work, probably including some
genetic engineering or such to make animals
and people safe against the ailments we associate
to low gravity.
Though I should note we don’t know for sure
what those are.
We know what zero-gravity or micro-gravity
does to the body, but we genuinely don’t
know how much gravity would be needed to avoid
or mitigate those effects.
Mars and Mercury for instance, at the high
end of category 4, might be just fine on their
own.
    On the same note, most of these objects
could hold an atmosphere if you were willing
to work to maintain it.
This category includes Mars, Mercury, Pluto
and all the other dwarf planets, and the sixteen
biggest moons in the solar system including
our own.
Let me qualify that, it technically would
not include Ceres, the largest asteroid or
closest dwarf planet to the sun, which is
just under a thousand kilometers, and the
only asteroid in the belt with a real claim
on dwarf planet status, and some of the other
dwarf planet candidates come in at 900 km
or so.
I will include those in category 4 just so
we can say all the categories below this are
those where the objects are now only spherical
from general coincidence, not gravity.
    Nothing below this category can be
expected to have reasonably uniform gravity
over the entire surface or not cause serious
low-gravity issues or hold an atmosphere without
a dome over it.
On any of these places you could expect to
discharge a pistol and have the bullet land
on the ground eventually, beneath this category
it would go flying off into space.
    A couple of notes.
First, if you add up all the category 4, 5
and 6 objects in the solar system, and probably
most other solar systems, you won’t get
into triple digits.
There’s about thirty such objects in our
solar system.
On the other hand there are about 200 countries
on this planet and several times that number
if we included every sub-division, ethnicity,
religion, or ideology big enough to count
as its own country.
The sorts of places or groups who could get
their hands on a billion bucks if they need
to.
You don’t necessarily need to be a country
to have a colony.
    Now those 30 objects aren’t enough
for everyone to have one of their own, which
is okay because those places could all host
dozens or even thousands of unique colonies
and they could come from any number of nations
or groups, but it would be hard for one nation
back here to just claim total ownership of,
say, Mars.
So the smaller objects, the Category 3 kind,
the ones between a hundred and a thousand
kilometers in radius, get a lot more tempting.
At least if you want one rock of your own,
because there are a few hundred of those in
the solar system, so you could start thinking
about making a singular claim on one of those.
When we get to category 2, 10-100 km across,
there’s several thousand of those just in
the Asteroid Belt alone and many thousands
of others, and it is easy to forget that any
one of those could easily be turned into a
place that could comfortably house an entire
planetary population, I’ll explain that
in a bit.
But there’s enough of them that anybody
with the resources to be thinking about having
a colony could stake a singular claim to at
least one.
Now these can’t be classically terraformed
but we’ll get to that in a bit too.
Your category 1 objects, 1-10 km, are also
quite attractive objects, being the size of
a mountain or metropolis and numbering in
the hundreds of thousands just in the asteroid
belt alone.
There’s probably many millions further out
when we throw in Comets, Kuiper Belt objects,
and stuff out in the Oort Cloud.
These are also great colony prospects because
as we’ll see they could be transformed into
places that would be nice sized countries
in their own right.
Even our category 0 objects, those less than
a kilometer across, make for nice colonies
if you’re only trying to make something
that could support a fairly decent sized community
that was fairly self-sufficient.
These sizes also tell us a lot about how stuff
reaches the colony and where people live.
Category 4 objects mostly don’t have atmospheres
but can maybe have them, and can also have
space elevators on them that don’t need
to be made out of super materials.
Beneath this, while space elevators can still
work in some cases, they mostly don’t serve
any purpose.
Ships just land and take off and in a lot
cases can do so with virtually no fuel expenditure.
Or even no fuel expenditure, many would be
able to get away with having a runway where
a magnet or tow cable just dragged them up
to speed or where they literally just collided
with a spring or the colony just snagged them
with a magnet on a tether and slowly halted
them and reeled them in.
That changes the game a lot, especially in
a place like the asteroid belt, which while
nowhere near as dense as fiction often portrays
it, could easily have the equivalent to passenger
planes or buses or even cars that just went
back and forth to nearby asteroids.
You could have individual asteroid homes,
small village equivalents or even single family
residences people could essentially drive
to the bigger asteroids from.
A 100 meter wide asteroid, a category negative
one I suppose, would be nice for this purpose
and there are tens of millions of those in
the Belt.
Now they are separated by hundreds of thousands
of miles from each other but that’s maybe
a day of travel tops and what’s more it’s
only a seconds of light lag on any communication.
Plus, you can just move one.
I mean we’ve talked about moving whole solar
systems and even galaxies on this channel,
moving a rock the size of a mansion through
the void of space to be a million kilometers
close to a bigger asteroid colony barely even
qualifies as a task.
So you could just shove your asteroid to a
100 kilometers away from some Category 2 or
3 asteroid and fly over to it to go shopping.
We’ve talked before about hollowing out
asteroids and slowly disassembling them to
reassemble them as megastructures, but you
can also latch them together quite easily.
The gravitational force between two asteroids
in the 10 kilometer diameter range, say 20
kilometers apart, is low enough you wouldn’t
even have to mess around with putting them
into orbit of each other, you could literally
hold them apart with a rigid metal shaft.
A decently thick and sturdy one, but nothing
requiring massive feats of engineering or
super-science.
You could even snatch smaller asteroids with
a very long tether and reel them in.
We’ll come back to this stuff in a bit,
but let us address our other category type
first, distance from the Sun.
Now I say distance from the Sun but I also
mean Earth.
Except for Mercury and Venus and maybe Mars
and the Near Earth Asteroids this is essentially
the same thing.
We discussed the inner and outer solar system
recently, breaking them at the asteroid belt,
but I want to break into 5 more distinct categories
today  instead:  Inner, middle, outer, deep,
and Extrasolar.
Here I will consider Inner to be any place
as close to the Sun as Earth or closer.
Of Natural objects that is Mercury, Venus,
Earth, the Moon, and the Near Earth Asteroids.
But as those of you familiar with the channel
know, we would often be thinking about making
artificial habitats all over this volume as
a build up to a Dyson Swarm.
Here light is not only more than abundant
enough to grow plants and use solar power,
which is great in space since there’s no
night time or clouds, but actually can be
so abundant you might need to take steps to
block it.
The Inner region is also where communications
are fast.
Not only is there likely to be plenty of people
living within real-time communication distance
with you, where a phone call might just feel
a little slow, but you can talk to anyone
in the inner region within minutes not hours.
Even a call to the other side of the inner
region and the return time on an answer is
only half an hour.
I will count Mars and the Asteroid Belt as
the Middle Solar System and also Jupiter and
its moons and trojan asteroids.
This is the region where there’s not a lot
of sunlight but it is still plentiful enough
to either grow plants and use with solar panels
or at least wouldn’t need much augmentation.
Out past Jupiter, as I’ve mentioned before,
solar is still an option but not a very good
one.
Everything has to be scaled up massively to
acquire and concentrate the kind of power
you need.
Technically you can live on solar power anywhere
in the galaxy or even the Universe since there
is a decent amount of ambient light, but even
ignoring that you would need panel and mirror
arrays the size of football stadium to power
a lightbulb, you have to consider the sheer
construction and maintenance costs compared
to just buying some uranium to run a fission
plant.
It’s still semi-viable in the outer region,
which I consider to be from Saturn out through
the Kuiper Belt, but these are not places
for serious colonization until you have fusion
or can at least have huge solar arrays near
the sun beaming energy out to colonies.
So out in this region, with the exception
of a couple of the larger moons, surface habitation
is just pointless.
It exposes you to radiation and micrometeors,
but the sun is still bright enough you could
comfortably walk around without a flashlight
during the day.
Type 4, Deep Space, out past the Kupier Belt,
is where space is incredibly uncomfortable
and totally your enemy.
There’s no point having anything on the
surface of whatever iceball you’ve settled
besides your landing spots, which would probably
have retractable armored shutters over them,
and your transmitters and receivers and maybe
an observation dome or two because the night
sky is likely to be a rather pleasant sight
out there.
You could conceivably still use solar by beamed
energy out here.
That’s actually a cheap trick for moving
comets into the solar system, you coat one
side with solar panels and beam energy to
it to power an ion thruster that uses some
of the ice as propellant.
Fission remains possible too but I just don’t
see the point, you might get a colony or two
out there just prove it could be done but
nobody would develop this region seriously
until fusion was cheap and easy, in which
case every object out there looks like a giant
tank of gasoline.
As to our last category, extrasolar, that
will be our topic for our third video though
it could technically include stuff that was
so far out it didn’t count as part of our
solar system anymore.
Those are the same as deep space habitats
for all practical purposes though.
Now before we abandon talking about solar
power entirely as an option, I did want to
bring up slight addendum to something I call
a mushroom habitat.
We introduced those when discussing Mercury
in the two-parter with Fraser Cain a few weeks
back and I should probably note I coined that
term, though I’m sure someone came up with
the concept before.
One of things about futurism is you do have
to coin terms sometimes and you just cross
your fingers if you come up with a bad or
silly one, that someone renames it.
The funny thing is that the idea started backwards.
The Mercury version is meant to shield you
from sunlight, and that trick works on habitats
near the sun too, if you need a place for
people to live who are tending to massive
solar arrays placed as close to the sun as
they can be without melting.
Simple setup, mushroom side toward the sun
to block light, reflective surface to bounce
most of it away.
But my original version was backwards for
deeper out in space.
Big rotating cylinder habitat at the stem
out where the sun is getting a bit weak for
use, and behind it is the mushroom cap as
a parabolic dish reflecting in concentrated
sunlight.
So if solar is your power source you would
expect an awful lot of the asteroid, small
moon, or free floating habitats to use this
scheme out in the middle regions past Earth
out to Jupiter, and maybe further too.
I should probably have just called those a
parabolic dish habitat but mushroom sounds
neater.
It’s also a great setup to receive beamed
power further out if you need to go that route,
so figure on anything past Mars using this
sort of setup if they have not got fusion.
Beyond things like that, except for those
thirty or so objects which might have enough
gravity or might be augmented by combining
spin gravity and local gravity, the colonies
ought to look a lot alike.
Everybody lives inside.
We have talked about rotating habitats more
times than I can count so I won’t go over
that again.
Of course you do always have the option of
either non-uniform gravity by not making your
cylinder radially symmetric, like a pair of
connected cones instead.
Or just telling gravity to take a hike and
just taking whatever measures are necessary
to make your population and attached flora
and fauna able to survive in microgravity.
You can combine rotating habitats and zero
gravity environments too, in fact the easiest
way to connect rotating habitats is with hubs
that don’t have gravity, which would let
you produce huge networks of cylinder habitats
in two or three dimensions.
You would probably expand into your asteroid
by making more cylinders inside and take excess
material to cover over ones built outside
it, as protective shielding, or shipped off
as exports for trade.
This is what I meant about being able to turn
a Category 3 object into something that could
hold an entire planetary population.
Even just a hollowed out asteroid packed with
cylinders is going to be vastly larger in
living area than the surface of that asteroid
was, but you can build outward too, taking
that hollowed out material and basically dumping
it around the outside of a big balloon you
just inflated as needed until all the matter
was either in the cylinders or in that outer
shell.
You could cannibalize that too and just replace
it with a layer of compressed hydrogen or
something.
Hydrogen is great for blocking radiation,
incredibly abundant, and the fuel for fusion
anyway.
That’s way down the line though, not technologically,
just that it would take centuries before we
would fill up all the normal, unmodified rocks.
There’s no hard and fast rule about how
thick the floor should be on a rotating habitat,
especially since you can do multiple levels,
but I usually just use a ton per square meter
as a ballpark figure.
In that context a 10 kilometer wide asteroid,
the cutoff between category 2 and 3, masses
out at about a trillion tons and so a trillion
square meters or a million square kilometers,
about the size of Egypt or five times larger
than Great Britain.
The 100 kilometer wide kind at the cutoff
of category 3 and 4 would have a thousand
times the mass and thus a thousand times the
area, which would be about two Earth’s worth,
including the oceans and ice caps, and there
are hundreds of these and many thousands of
the smaller kind.
Lot’s of room to grow, but how big should
you start?
    Bigger is better when it comes to founding
a colony, the more the better because it allows
more specialization and self-sufficiency.
For instance if I want to have a court, any
kind of court, I need at least 3 lawyers in
my colony, a judge and an advocate for both
sides.
Realistically I need 4 to handle conflicts
of interest and to give a defendant at least
some choice in who defends them.
That would mean 4% of your population would
be  lawyers, in a colony of 100 people.
The norm is more like a tenth of that, and
that would mean a population of a thousand
people to support 4 of them at the normal
distribution.
Now you don’t necessarily need courts on
a colony and it doesn’t necessarily have
to be their full time job, but that won’t
be the only profession like that.
There are a lot specialist areas you can do
without, like an insurance salesman, because
you could source that from home, ditto a neurologist
is better in person but he could do a decent
job remotely by analyzing scans and diagnoses
taken by a general practitioner on site.
There are a lot of other things you do need
on site though, things that also take a ton
of training time, like a veterinarian or nurse
or surgeon or dentist.
Also, after the initial colonies you have
a recruitment problem.
When you have something as prestigious as
one of the first colonies and when you have
tens of thousands of possible candidates for
each specialty, you can find yourself a person
with three or four of the necessary specializations
and who doesn’t mind doing one that is kind
of grubby.
I have difficulty seeing a colony of less
than a hundred people, and I think a thousand
is a lot more reasonable for anything that
doesn’t allow near real time communication
with Earth.
When we talk about extrasolar colonies though,
I’d be thinking more like tens of thousands,
because while you can bring all the knowledge
of earth with you on data storage, that doesn’t
equate to expertise and there’s nobody to
call on for help.
    Though for all these cases you need
to consider the impact of things like transhumans.
People who have had their intelligence amped
up can learn faster, people who live a lot
longer than now can absorb more specialties,
and it implies access to a lot automation
that let’s you save your people for mostly
mental work, some or all of which might be
doable by an artificial intelligence too.
    Talking about lawyers and courts bring
up the idea of how you administrate your colony.
We will save the case of total independence
for episode 3 since, barring us figuring out
how to cheat the speed of light, those have
to operate totally independently from day
1.
I’m also not interested in discussing the
notion of rebellion and secession, we already
have tons of examples of that in history and
each occasion tends to be somewhat unique.
    I generally tend to assume most colonies
in the solar system will be under some existing
nation, even if it is nearly autonomous and
basically just has a deal cut with some nation
to represent their interests at home.
Like some minor but stable nation back on
Earth agrees to act as the intermediary where
diplomacy is concerned in exchange for you
landing your goods at their spacedock.
    Interests back home are worth remembering
too.
Not all of a colony is going to be actually
at the colony.
Some might follow along later as the infrastructure
allows more to come, or just support the idea
enthusiastically but not want to go themselves.
I remember in one of David Weber’s books
it is mentioned that the colony that founded
the protagonist's home system of Manticore
had intentionally left funds behind on Earth
in an administered trust fund building up
compound interest so they had resources back
on Earth to buy new technologies or pay for
colonists passage fees.
The author remarked there that it was something
few other colonies had thought to do but I
took that as a bit of poke at a lot of other
science fiction where such an obvious good
idea never gets mentioned and presumably wasn’t
thought of.
Of course a colony would have a law firm back
on Earth watching their interests.
Of course they would have a lot of consulting
groups they could call on to serve as the
crisis team when things go wrong like NASA
mission control does now.
The fusion reactor broke, the spare component
has been used, you are a year from the nearest
place that can send you one.
It’s handy have some folks back on Earth
who can take an inventory of everything you’ve
got and MacGyver up a functional spare.
Even if you are a colony that is specifically
looking to get away from Earth cultures, and
somehow brought everyone with you, rather
than just an initial team funded and supplied
by a larger group back home, there’d probably
be plenty of firms that would become specialists
in the necessary issues colonies tended to
face.
As to what government people would use, we
just don’t know.
Frankly I consider it kind of absurd to ask
that anyway for two reasons.
First, I doubt everyone would use the same
kind, and second, I’m strongly of the opinion
that whatever kind they use is their decision
at that time.
Which means it will change as the colony ages
too.
It’s a very popular topic when colonization
comes up, and we will talk about it a bit
more in episode 3, but in my experience if
you ask ten people every one will give a different
answer and half of them will be completely
convinced almost every colony will use one
specific approach to self-governance which
just happens to correspond to their ownidea
of Utopia.
Their confidence in this will not be one bit
shaken by everyone disagreeing with them or
noticing that a few of the other folks are
just as confident with their own entirely
different vision of how things can and indeed
must be.
    So what is day-to-day life on the colony
like?
The simple answers are we don’t know, because
it would depend way too much on the colony’s
purpose, the reason it was founded, and the
technologies available.
What we’ve been doing today is trying to
set the background for people to consider
this themselves.
The other simple answer is probably a lot
like now in many ways.
I mean my day-to-day life is almost certainly
very different from yours and every other
person on this channel.
We have our work, our family and friends,
and our hobbies.
We juggle them to get them done the best we
can and it often involves unpleasant parts
even if we mostly enjoy it.
Now we have a bit of a better picture about
what those colonies are going to be like in
order to consider that idea, but in the end,
much like now, we can only take that so far
because it is too broad a concept that is
going to vary too much.
Life for a mining engineer on Ganymede just
won’t be much like the life of a doctor
on an orbital farm near Earth or his like
that of a surgeon who serves at a hub for
a lot of smaller colonies.
We will look a bit more into day-to-day tasks
in the next two episodes now that we’ve
got more of the basics in place.
Speaking of that, in next week’s episode
we will be looking both at interstellar colony
ships, often called generation ships and ark
ships, as well as interplanetary colony ships.
Frequently you will actually use your ship
directly as your first colonial structure
so it is worth examining.
We will also talk about some of the crew concepts,
daily chores, and also how we might select
candidates for colonies during recruitment.
In the third episode we will cover a number
of the topics we had to bypass today but our
big focus will be on that first interstellar
colony, and in many ways it will more closely
resemble early interplanetary colonies.
We sort of skipped those today to look at
what colonies will be like when it’s not
a brand new and prestigious thing, because
I wanted to save it for the more pioneering
tone of an early extrasolar colony.
If you want alerts when those and other videos
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, make sure to
hit the like button, share it with others,
and try out some of the other episodes on
the channel.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great day!
