This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Interstellar space is beyond enormous,  
in order to travel between the stars we 
will need the power of the stars.
 
So today we will be taking a look at spaceship 
propulsion focusing on fusion-based drives,  
and we’ll be looking at both the various 
possible fusion drive systems and what  
they would really mean in practical terms. 
In that regard we will discuss the possible  
speeds such ships might obtain and what sort 
of costs we might see for passengers or cargo,  
both for interplanetary travel and for 
interstellar travel, though for the latter  
especially we will have to be rather speculative.
This is not our first time discussing fusion as  
a power source, so we will skim over some 
of the basic function and economic impacts  
that we explored in our Fusion Power 
and Impact of Nuclear Fusion episodes,  
but we have several different fusion drive 
scenarios and each would look very different.
 
The key ones we will consider for today will be 
Fusion Torch Drives vs Fusion-powered Ion drives,  
the Bussard Ramjet, Deuterium-based fusion, 
Helium-3 Fusion, plain Hydrogen fusion,  
and Pulsed Fusion – which is essentially 
shooting hydrogen bombs out behind a ship.
 
That last one, Pulsed Fusion, is the only one 
we currently have the technology for and folks  
are not overly anxious to construct a ship 
to Mars or Alpha Centauri that would leave  
Earth’s Orbit with a cargo bay full of nuclear 
bombs, and pushed from orbit by them – we’ll  
discuss how this might be done and possibly safely 
later today but for the moment it reminds us that  
while fusion often gets called the technology of 
future, and always will be, it is something we  
have actually had for an entire human lifetime, 
since the mid-20th century, just as bombs.
 
We also need to start with two other reminders. 
First, while shooting bombs out the back of a  
ship sounds dangerous, it is essentially what we 
already do with jets and rockets, just scaled up,  
and any interstellar drive needs to be operating 
at those hydrogen bomb levels of energy anyway.  
This is why we often say on the show that 
there is no such thing as an unarmed spaceship,  
since the energies needed to 
push them between worlds is  
easily convertible into a weapon and 
a terrifyingly powerful one at that. 
 
Second, just as any ship with such a spaceship 
drive is carrying a world-busting arsenal with it,  
those same engines should be available to their 
civilization for non-space uses. A fusion-powered  
economy is one of titanic capabilities. Not only 
can a fusion-powered ship reach Mars in days not  
months, but the society with a fusion economy 
can mass-manufacture hundreds of ships  
hundreds of times bigger than what we tend to 
plan for that trip now. And when those ships land,  
they’ll each have a powerplant capable of brute 
force producing all the metal, glass, and air  
any growing domed colony could plausibly need. 
They could even brute force extract minerals by  
centrifuge or heating and 3D print stuff where 
that would be recklessly uneconomical to us.
 
Fusion is the power of the Sun, something so 
potent it was routinely worshiped as a god by  
our ancestors, once harnessed to our control, 
it lets us perform tasks of unimaginable scope,  
not just run the ships using it.
But let’s move on to those ships  
by quickly covering how fusion works. In the 
first place, we need to understand the kind of  
power levels involved. As Einstein showed with 
E=mc², mass and thus all matter is also energy,  
and because of the multiplier and squared term, 
it ends up being quite a lot. Chemical fuels are  
incredibly powerful, but their energy has to do 
with changing around the relatively weak bonds  
between molecules and atoms. It's not something 
we tend to think of when burning gasoline,  
since it all burns away, but it is actually losing 
mass as it transforms into various byproducts. 
 
The amount of mass it loses in this 
transmutation is equal to the energy it emitted,  
in accordance with E=mc², and yet we’re not 
even losing a millionth of the starting mass  
through such a transaction. If you were to 
add up all the mass of air and fuel burned,  
then add up all the gas and ash that fuel leaves, 
what you’re left with will be nearly the same as  
where you started, minus just a tiny fraction.
Nuclear forces do around a million times better,  
as this involves a massive rearrangement of the 
vast sea of real and virtual quarks making up  
the core of an atom, not the tiny electrons 
orbiting at the periphery. However it takes  
vastly stronger forces to ignite these 
changes, not temperatures of hundreds of  
degrees but temperatures of millions of degrees 
and pressures far beyond what occurs on Earth  
or even in its crushing and scorching interior. 
These rearrangements of the nucleus of an atom,  
fission or fusion, produce far more energy 
but require far greater efforts to achieve.
 
Fission, the cutting of big atoms into small ones, 
differs from fusion – the combining of small atoms  
to make bigger ones – in two key ways. First, 
there are vastly more of these small atoms lying  
around, making it a cheaper and more abundant 
fuel in the same way seawater is more abundant  
than gold, and second, this energy is usually a 
decent fraction of a proton or neutron’s mass,  
so the energy released by fission of one atom 
of uranium – composed of hundreds of protons and  
neutrons, is on par with what we get from fusing a 
hydrogen or helium atom of just one or two protons  
and neutrons. So while the energy released per 
atom is similar for fusion and fission, the atoms  
involved in hydrogen or helium fusion are far more 
numerous per kilogram of fuel and there are just  
far more kilograms of that fuel lying around. 
There are other advantages too, but it is why we  
often see nuclear spaceships proposed, because 
while fission might not be as good as fusion,  
it's still vastly better than chemical fuels, see 
our episode the Nuclear Option for discussion of  
those. Even though Uranium and Thorium are rarer 
than Hydrogen and Helium, there’s still more than  
enough of the stuff available in our solar system 
to power millions of spaceships up to speeds  
permitting interplanetary and even interstellar 
colonization. We’ll be talking about the specific  
ways a given drive aims to achieve fusion but 
this is why it is desired as a power source.
 
On the show we often discuss alternatives like 
fission or solar power, or even antimatter and  
black holes for driving spaceships, but we do this 
while recognizing that we don’t have fusion yet  
and that even if it’s something we somehow 
never achieve, we can still journey to the  
stars through other means. Fundamentally though, 
it's always been fusion that offers that promise  
as the leading candidate, with the other 
runners-up getting discussed here as a  
‘just in case’ or as hypothetical upgrades. 
Fusion, the power of the stars, offers us the  
chance to journey to those stars and does so 
by throwing out so much energy a spaceship  
in orbit of a world would look like a star 
when its engine came on. In fact that’s a  
bit of an understatement, since bigger ships 
might light the sky up like a second sun,  
but this is part of why certain types of fusion 
drives are known as a Torch Drive or Torchship,  
a term we get from Science Fiction Great Robert 
Heinlein, although the ships described as such  
in Heinlein’s works actually were using straight 
matter-to-energy conversion, not the roughly 1%  
conversion we see with hydrogen fusion, and 
most fusion types don’t do even that well. 
 
Torch drives are the muscle cars of 
rocketry, combining the high fuel  
efficiency of something like an ion drive with 
the high output-per-second of a rocket engine..  
Folks tend to forget we don’t really need a higher 
thrust than what chemical fuels provide, we just  
need something that will keep producing it for 
days rather than seconds or minutes. The specific  
impulse of a fuel, normally given in seconds, is 
how long a given fuel could hold a ship up against  
the pull of Earth’s gravity. A decent rocket 
fuel can provide a few hundred seconds of that.  
We usually burn it even faster though, with 
enough force to pin people to their seats,  
so producing force faster than this isn’t usually 
a priority. Rather the hoped for upside of a torch  
drive is that it can produce this thrust not for 
hundreds of seconds but for millions of seconds.
 
This is the other half of the game, protracted 
acceleration. Here on Earth almost every type of  
travel we do involves a brief period of speeding 
up and slowing down, and most of your time and  
energy is spent cruising along and maintaining 
that effort. Since space is fairly empty, very  
little effort goes into maintaining speed, but 
it's also insanely huge so you have to spend a lot  
of time crossing it unless you can go ridiculously 
fast. Because of how fast you’d need to go, it  
takes a lot of time and a lot of energy to speed 
up or slow down to and from those insane speeds. 
 
Mars for instance is a long way off, varying from 
55 million kilometers or 34 million miles at its  
closest to 400 million kilometers or 250 million 
miles at its furthest. This means even light  
takes 4 to 24 minutes to cross that distance, 
varying as Earth and Mars both orbit the Sun.  
Our ships travel slow enough that we can’t 
send them in a fairly straight line either,  
but the hope is that a fusion ship could travel 
fast enough that it was a fairly straight course.  
Such being the case, how long 
would such a journey take?
 
The thing is that humans don’t handle high 
accelerations well. It's essentially the  
same as gravity, so a ship just doing 1-gee of 
acceleration, akin to normal earth gravity where  
the rocket nozzle is essentially in your basement 
of your ship, not the back like an airplane,  
and is probably as fast as you would want to 
accelerate. Emergency or Military vessels might do  
more, but probably at the cost of fuel efficiency 
and maximum possible speed for longer trips.
 
Incidentally, this means that such ships, these 
torchships able to maintain high thrust for long  
times, are closer to a skyscraper than an 
airplane. Your destination is upward toward  
the roof, and the engine is down in the basement, 
not the back. All your gravity is being provided  
by thrust so if it turns down, gravity goes 
down, if it turns off, you’re in zero-g,  
and if it suddenly turns on again, or turns 
on sideways to dodge something, you can get  
smashed around and potentially killed. 
In fiction we often see ships with effectively  
infinite fuel that will burn the entire time, 
and they reverse at their halfway point,  
what gets called a Turnover, on the assumption 
the ship might just turn itself over to point the  
engine toward the destination and slow down. This 
is never the ideal way to use fuel efficiently,  
in a lot of cases you would end up burning an 
order of magnitude more fuel than if you took  
twice as long to get there, and should only happen 
in cases where the maximum acceleration the ship  
can achieve, or its crew or cargo can survive, 
is a bigger constraint than the fuel supply. 
 
Where we see torch drives we rarely 
get descriptions of how they work,  
and given the origin of the name they 
need not necessarily even run on fusion,  
antimatter would fit better, but it’s the 
assumption you can find a way to make fusion  
occur and presumably spit its byproducts out at 
full speed behind the ship as its propellant.  
The exhaust velocity of the typical rocket flame 
is in the thousands of meters per second range,  
which is also the general zone of what orbital 
velocities of planets are, both to orbit them and  
in their own orbit around the Sun and why chemical 
rocket fuels can just barely get the job done,  
though often requiring virtually all 
of ship be composed of its fuel. 
 
Ion Drives function by using energy to run 
magnets to spit particles out the back an  
order of magnitude faster, but a torch drive 
is usually assumed to be firing particles  
out the back at thousands of kilometers per 
second instead, at a small but significant  
percentage of light speed. In all other respects 
a torch drive is treated like any other rocket,  
burning hot flame out the back shoving 
the ship along till the fuel is spent.  
Although again in such cases it isn’t really the 
back of the ship, it is the floor of the ship.
 
It would not be realistic to expect to 
get the maximum hypothetical exhaust  
velocities out of a fusion fuel but let’s 
list some major one’s theoretical maximums.  
The exhaust velocity for Deuterium-Deuterium 
Fusion - generally viewed as the easiest type of  
fusion to achieve – is 4.3% of light speed, which 
is 13,000 kilometers or 8000 miles per second.  
For comparison, this is about 3000 times faster 
than burning hydrogen as a chemical fuel,  
meaning that an otherwise identical rocket fusing 
deuterium would be able to move 3000x times faster  
than one burning hydrogen. Helium-3 is about 
half again as good at 6.8% of light speed,  
Deuterium-Tritium comes in around double at 8.7%, 
and regular hydrogen proton-proton fusion comes in  
at a whopping 11.7%. Hypothetically you can do 
even better with multiple fusion chains running  
hydrogen potentially all the way up to iron.
See the always excellent Project Rho website if  
you want a run down on how that’s all calculated 
and some of the other fusion options. And again  
those are absolute maxes, Deuterium-Tritium for 
instance releases most of its energy as neutrons  
which are very hard to control and 
redirect so getting even half of that 8.7%  
exhaust velocity would be optimistic without 
some bit of Clarketech for redirecting neutrons,  
something we also cited as useful for creating 
neutron beams in our recent episode on Death Rays.  
It's an important reminder that just because 
you can slam a bunch of atoms together  
doesn’t mean you can make them and their 
byproducts all dance to your tune and  
exit out the back like a rocket flame.
Now if we are treating it as just another  
rocket fuel, you’re probably aware that liquid 
hydrogen is one of the more popular rocket  
fuels in spite of being hard to handle exactly 
because it’s got such a high exhaust velocity.  
However, that exhaust velocity is still 
only about half Earth’s low orbit speed  
and even slower than the delta-v needed for going 
to higher orbits, the Moon, or other planets.  
This is why we need most of a rocket to be its 
fuel. If the exhaust velocity is less than the  
delta-v needed this is not the case, and generally 
you can only get a ship up to around quadruple  
the exhaust velocity before your payload is so 
small it’s only a couple percent of the initial  
ship mass including the fuel. And only double if 
you need to use that rocket to slow down too. 
 
There’s no actual limit as to how fast any ship 
can go off a given fuel, but even by 8 times  
the exhaust velocity, or 4 times if you want to 
slow down, your payload mass is down to 0.03%,  
3000 kilograms of fuel for every kilogram of 
payload, and it only gets worse from there.  
Folks like to ask a lot how fast a fusion-powered 
ship could go and I think it irritates a lot  
of them when I or others ballpark it at 10% of 
light speed, they want something more precise,  
but that’s generally why we do. I’m assuming they 
aren’t getting that ideal proton-proton fusion at  
full efficiency and that they are planning to 
slow down and want to carry a lot of cargo. 
 
Hypothetically even 50% of light 
speed isn’t off the table though,  
especially for something like a missile. And 
while it might take ridiculous ratios of fuel  
to payload, it is worth noting that fusion fuels 
are beyond abundant, so you might not care if you  
use a million tons of fuel per ton of payload for 
a colony ship. 20% though is probably on the high  
end of plausible for colony vessels and a nicely 
round number which is why I used it as the upgrade  
case for Unity in our old episodes following 
that hypothetical interstellar colony ship.
 
I don’t want to say that a Torchship is 
unrealistic, not at all, but they are a  
pretty vague concept so it’s hard to call them 
realistic or unrealistic. The three leading  
ways to make one would be antimatter-catalyzed 
fusion, a micro-black-hole, or a Bussard Ramjet.
 
We’ve discussed black hole powered ships in 
their own episode so we’ll bypass that today  
beyond saying this is probably the closest thing 
to what Heinlein original Torchship description  
would be with matter to energy conversion. 
However, there are a few ways to run ships  
on black holes. We’ll come back to the Bussard 
Ramjet, but antimatter catalyzed fusion is a  
good lead into pulsed fusion propulsion 
because it’s essentially the same thing.  
This is where a little antimatter is used 
to set off fission or fusion fuel as a  
small nuclear bomb, most of the energy derives 
from that hydrogen or other fusion fuel though.  
See our Antimatter episode for a discussion 
of the specifics but the concept is lots of  
pellets containing antimatter and fusion 
fuel being spat out the back of the ship.
 
This lets you use smaller explosions than setting 
of traditional Hydrogen Bombs and this ties  
in with what I was saying earlier about Turnover 
and why it isn’t desirable unless your maximum  
acceleration the crew and cargo can survive 
is a bigger bottleneck than your fuel supply.  
A nuclear explosion obviously releases a 
lot of energy from a little bit of mass,  
and a hydrogen bomb or fusion bomb does this even 
more energetically per unit of mass than a uranium  
or plutonium bomb does. Pulsed nuclear propulsion 
is the idea that you can set a bomb off and ride  
the wave, and the bigger the bomb is, the bigger 
the wave, but the harder it is to safely absorb.  
Hence we tend to consider using a large number 
of smaller fission bombs but they don’t carry  
as much energy per unit mass as a fusion 
bomb, and thus have a lower maximum speed. 
 
Now that safe absorption issue isn’t actually 
about not being killed by the blast or radiation  
in a conventional sense. The general notion is 
to put a big thick metal plate behind the ship  
that’s wide enough to absorb a big fraction of the 
blast, which shoves the ship forward and of course  
the radiation will strip off some of the plate 
with each blast but that merely acts as additional  
propellant as hot vaporized layers of the 
pusher-plate fly out from the back of the ship.  
The bigger issue is that this giant plate 
absorbing all this energy is now ramming forward,  
so the idea is to have it on a great big spring 
that slows it and more slowly shoves the rest of  
the ship forward, and you detonate the next 
one after the pusher plate fully returns,  
ideally converting all that blast into good 
smooth push for those inside the main ship.
 
Now the issue there is that this requires huge 
ships, and even larger ones for those using  
fusion bombs instead of smaller fission nukes. 
But to emphasize there is nothing stopping you  
from building one today anymore than there’s 
anything stopping us from using this same sort  
of trick to make a fusion reactor by detonating 
nukes in very big tanks of water and collecting  
their steam then detonating another as it 
cools. If you don’t mind making your ship  
truly massive then you can run them smoothly 
on h-bombs, indeed we have contemplated running  
ridiculously large ships off this sort of 
pulsed propulsion scaled up to use cosmic  
blast like novas, supernovas, or even quasars. 
One caveat though, a very big and massive pusher  
plate could as easily be recast as an equally 
massive but vastly larger and thinner mirror or  
solar sail for absorbing sunlight or laser beams, 
or in reverse, you might ride laser propulsion out  
of a system to get up to speed then contract 
the sail to use as a pusher plate with pulsed  
propulsion to slow down at your destination. 
Hybrid ship drives have many advantages.
 
Antimatter catalyzed nukes let us avoid 
using hundreds of kilograms of uranium  
or plutonium and conventional explosives for 
a fission bomb or even more for a fusion bomb,  
and thus a much smaller pusher plate 
more akin to a standard rocket nozzle.  
We believe as little as a microgram of antimatter 
might do the trick to catalyze a very small nuke.  
Obviously antimatter is a way better rocket fuel 
if you can make and store it cheaply and safely,  
but it is quite probable that producing antimatter 
would always be an energy loser in terms of energy  
put in to make it, in which case using it as 
a fusion catalyst might be very appealing.
 
I do rate this as one of the more probable 
drive systems though because if you can  
make a working fusion engine, it does not 
mean you necessarily have a torch drive,  
but it does mean you have a strong and steady 
power source which can divert some of its energy  
to making antimatter which could then be used to 
run a fusion drive by this antimatter catalyzed  
micro-fusion bomb approach. It's also a 
way to store energy for use when you want  
it which is tricky with a reactor you would 
expect to run constantly at a set rate. 
 
That sort of rate is fine for most spaceship 
missions, you have a destination in mind and you  
accelerate to a calculated amount then 
cruise till it’s time to slow down.  
It doesn’t really contemplate much sudden need for 
higher acceleration and in different directions,  
and micro-nukes permit smaller ships but also 
smaller pusher plates which might emerge from  
various angles of a ship to be used for lateral 
motion like dodging space debris. Indeed there  
has been a range of approaches contemplated in 
the last few decades for propelling a ship via  
continuous explosions of small fusion pellets. 
It tends to give you the high specific impulse of  
classic fusion drives while accelerating closer 
to the relatively high rate of pulse drives,  
and it’s sometimes called micropulse. Daedalus can 
be considered an early example of this concept.  
One other note, those big pusher plates 
can be turned around long before you reach  
your destination to serve as a forward shield 
against space radiation and dust particles.
 
Two things I want to emphasize real quick. 
First, just because your fuel is a million  
times denser than chemical fuels doesn’t mean 
you can automatically tap that for anything  
like the implied speed boost. Our current fuels 
aren’t the only things made out of chemicals,  
the ships are too, and outside of the hypothetical 
torch drive the usual assumption is that fusion  
reaction, which is so hard to contain 
even compared to a normal fission reactor,  
is not something you can just vent out into space. 
You are extracting power, possibly as electricity,  
and may just be using it to run an ion drive 
or big flashlight to push your ship along. 
 
Helium-3 is attractive in this regard because its 
considered our best option for aneutronic fusion,  
which is fusion which releases less neutrons 
which are absolute murder on any containment  
system you try to keep them in, which 
includes magnetic containment since neutrons  
are electrically neutral. Aneutronic reactions 
might spit out a proton rather than a neutron,  
which can be magnetically contained or 
magnetically bounced out the back of the ship  
and charged particles are also much 
easier to generate electricity with.  
So it is viewed as a nicer option 
for spaceships in that regard. 
 
We often tend to assume fusion ships, 
or fission ships for that matter,  
are more likely to be slowly but steadily putting 
out power as heat and electricity we can run more  
conventional engines off of, with that reaction 
carefully sustained and nurtured in a reactor.
 
One quick note. There is a tendency to assume 
a stable fusion reactor is gushing power  
out at rates far faster than a regular 
nuclear reactor let alone a gas engine,  
but this is not exactly true. The Sun is hot 
and runs on fusion and is insanely bright,  
so it's easy to forget that the Sun 
only releases about one watt of power  
for every 5 tons of mass it has, compared to 
your typical engine which usually produces  
several thousand watts of power per ton. It just 
that such an engine runs on fuel that it would  
probably use around a ton a day, whereas the 
Sun burns its fuel over billions of years. 
 
Indeed only the brightest and shortest lived of 
stars even begin to have the kinds of internal  
pressures that permit fusion at such a rate 
that it would be handy for running a spaceship,  
and even then only in the kind of power to mass 
ratios of conventional engines or generators. When  
we talk about torch drives we’re talking about 
trying to simulate conditions in a supernova,  
not a regular star. We tend to think of non-torch 
fusion drives as fairly big and slow to accelerate  
but able to achieve pretty high velocities.
Now I mentioned that we might instead use  
electricity to shoot particles out the back or 
even a flashlight, and indeed photons of light  
are your optimal spaceship propellant in terms of 
mass. They move at light speed so have the maximum  
hypothetical exhaust velocity beyond something 
weirdly and probably non-existent like tachyons.  
Nuclear light bulbs or flashlights or 
laser-emitters or photon drives or photon rockets,  
many names or variations, but they are plausible.
They would be pretty bright, especially a laser  
drive approaching or departing a planet, 
though you could spit out two or more  
lasers at slightly different angles to avoid 
hitting your destination with your exhaust beam.  
I want to emphasize by the way how insanely 
bright and energetic a normal spaceship is  
if you are trying to run it up at 1-gee and it is 
some multi-megaton hulk dwarfing even an aircraft  
carrier or supertanker. Just giving it the delta-v 
needed to break orbit, maybe 10 kilometers per  
second, is implying a power release for around 
a thousand seconds of several trillion watts.  
Thousands of times more than our biggest 
powerplants and on par with what our whole  
civilization is using at any given moment. And 
to get to 10% of light speed it is going to need  
to keep that up for over a month. We’ll discuss 
travel times for ships between planets in a bit.
 
We wouldn’t expect all that energy to be in the 
visual spectrum, it would depend a lot on how  
it was being made what portion of it we could 
see with our naked eye, but putting that into  
visual light terms, you would be able to see 
that during the daytime quite easily while it  
was nearby and such a ship should be naked-eye 
visible at night even a million kilometers away  
or further. Needless to say that makes for a 
pretty powerful weapon with some modification,  
which is why we say there is no such thing 
as an unarmed spaceship on this show.  
Though its not exactly stealthy either, 
if aiming to sneak up and attack,  
which is why another thing we say on this show 
a lot is that there is no stealth in space.
 
One other option that might be a bit 
more stealthy, though still not stealthy,  
might be neutrino drives. A thing that gets 
produced a lot in nuclear processes are neutrinos  
and they go right through any containment we’ve 
got but they carry a lot of momentum. So one  
fusion-drive option, if we ever found a material, 
or metamaterial, that absorbed or reflected  
neutrinos, might be to wrap a ship’s reactor core 
in that material except for a hole out the back  
for neutrinos to fly out. Done right this also 
might seriously amplify your fusion reactor too. 
 
Now folks often wonder how long it takes to 
travel between planets with a given spaceship  
engine and of course. The answer really varies 
on where those planets are relative to each other  
but also on how fast you can speed up and how 
fast your maximum speed is. I mentioned near  
the start of the episode that Mars at its closest 
is a mere 4 light minutes away, but even if your  
ship can achieve 1% of light speed you aren’t 
getting to Mars is 400 minutes, because even if  
your ship can pull 1-g acceleration indefinitely 
you need a few days to reach 1% of light speed.  
For those watching the episode, I’ve 
got the formulas up on the screen for  
calculating this for classic Newtonian speeds.
You can get to the moon with a 1-g burn and  
turnover in 3-4 hours, Mars in 2 days at its 
closest, and similar for Mercury and Venus,  
and Mars at its furthest or any of the Asteroid 
Belt in under 4 days. Jupiter 6-7 days,  
Saturn 8-9, Uranus about 12, Neptune 15-16. For 
interstellar distances you can just divide the  
distance in light years by the fraction of light 
speed that the maximum is, because virtually  
all of that is spent cruising not speeding up, and 
at 1-g every week of acceleration or deceleration  
will add or subtract about 2% of light speed. 
One caveat though, when trying to shave time off  
a voyage, all things being equal, you want to 
accelerate quickly. If you have the option of  
accelerating at 2-g for five hours or 1-g 
for 10 hours and burning the same fuel,  
2-g is better because you will hit your max speed 
after five hours and only need to start slowing  
five hours out, not ten. And remember we do need 
fuel to slow, unless we’re a missile of course.  
In practice higher acceleration rates tend to be 
less fuel efficient but we shouldn’t assume that  
is automatically true of all drive types. This 
also assumes you have to carry all your fuel,  
something that rarely seems to 
trouble ships in science fiction  
but is a big issue for ships in science fact.
But you can also achieve higher speeds by not  
having to carry all your fuel with you, and this 
is where the Bussard Ramjet comes in, both to grab  
fuel for speeding up along the way and to avoid 
needing fuel to slow down. If you are already  
familiar with this device then that explanation 
likely included why it doesn’t work as planned,  
and that’s only sort-of true since it 
still might be great for slowing down,  
but it’s a claim that is focused on the specific 
suggested design for the Bussard Ramjet not the  
core concept, which is sucking matter in from the 
front and shooting it out the back while it fuses  
when passing through. This ignores alternatives 
like have a blackhole in its throat or keeping  
to slower speeds or using that interstellar gas 
simply as propellant heated by on board fuel.
 
The core concept of the Bussard ramjet is that 
most of space is full of ionized gas particles,  
most of which are hydrogen, a ready source 
of fusion fuel, and if you can grab these  
magnetically and suck them down into your 
ship you can use them as fuel. The ramjet  
part comes from parallels to how an air-breathing 
ramjet works, sucking air in and superheating it  
then shooting it out the back, but here the 
power source for heating that gas up is the  
gas itself by fusion, and that fusion is ignited 
by sucking in interstellar gas at relativistic  
speeds and jamming them tightly down the throat 
of the ship to ram into other gas particles  
at high speeds, temperatures, and pressures. 
This seemed like a possible way to give ships an  
infinite power supply, simply grabbing it out of 
space as they flew by like a ship sailing on a sea  
of diesel fuel. Indeed it was contemplated for a 
while as a way to keep accelerating indefinitely,  
something we see in the scifi classic novel 
Tau-Zero, but the math turned out not to  
work. Indeed some argue the method would 
actually require more energy than reaction  
released and result in the ship slowing. 
Two points on this though. First, slowing down is  
awesome if you get to do it for free, and this is 
essentially a physical or magnetic sail being used  
to slow a ship as it approaches its destination by 
scattering its momentum into all the interstellar  
gas and dust around it. Your scoop can be 
magnetic but costs you power to run it,  
or it can be physical but get eroded as 
you travel by gas and dust collisions,  
both have advantages. Second, there’s debate about 
if it can work at very high speeds as a ramjet,  
but works just fine for an occasion where 
absorbing the passing gas costs you less energy  
than you can produce from it if you’re using more 
of a collector rather than a ramjet approach.
 
As we were saying early, various fusion fuels 
have exhaust velocities in a torch drive of 4-12%  
of light speed so if your ship is designed 
to go slower than that, it ought to be able  
to suck hydrogen in and use it as fuel. This 
is an important distinction since different  
types of drives are converting this into thrust 
in different ways. As an example it works just  
fine with a black hole drive at fairly high speeds 
since black holes are converting at a much higher  
matter to energy ratio than fusion. So I don’t 
like to rule out some version of the ramjet,  
given how tempting the free fuel along the way 
is, but even if none of those work, the option for  
slowing down for free by magnetically dragging on 
interstellar gas is also a vast savings in fuel.
 
So there we have it, the major types of 
fusion propulsion discussed and roughly  
how they function. I said earlier that we often 
discuss alternatives to fusion not because it's  
not an awesome option but because it's such a good 
option folks fear there are no alternatives if we  
never get it working. Those options do exist 
and you can see those episodes for details,  
but fusion still offers the temptation of 
practical interplanetary and interstellar  
travel if we can but make it work. If 
we can harness the power of the stars,  
we will be able to journey 
out and claim the stars.
 
Today’s topic were rocket science and nuclear 
fusion, fascinating topics but legendary for  
being tricky to understand. Learning math and 
science can be pretty intimidating for many folks  
and if you’re trying to improve your own 
skills at those or have a loved one who is,  
I want to recommend Brilliant. 
If you've heard me talk about Brilliant before,  
then you know that it's a website 
and app built off the principle of  
active problem solving — because it takes more 
to learn something than just watching it — to  
really learn something, you have to do it. 
Over the last year, Brilliant has built a  
whole new platform for their courses that 
takes interactivity to the next level.  
Pre-Algebra, Mathematical Fundamentals, 
and Algorithm Fundamentals were the first  
courses launched on this platform and they just released a new Scientific Thinking course with this Center of Mass lesson,  
one of those concepts that’s vital to making 
sure a spaceship goes in the right direction  
instead of tumbling, and one of those 
topics where a good hands on example  
is the difference between getting a 
quick and clear understanding of a topic  
or spending hours trying to grasp a topic when a 
little interactivity makes it plain in moments.
 
You learn best while doing and solving in 
real-time, not by long lectures or memorising  
formulas and facts, and Brilliant understands 
that and has something for everybody — whether  
you want to start at the basics of math, science, 
and computer science, or go straight to advanced  
material. If you'd like to join me and a community 
of 8 million learners and educators today,  
click the link in the episode description down 
below or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
 
So this wraps us up for today but we’ll be back 
next week for a look at the Edge of the Universe,  
on Thursday, August 26th, then we’ll have our 
Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday, August 29th  
at 4 pm Eastern Time. That will finish us 
for August but we’ll leapright into September  
with a look at the Future of Thorium on September 
2nd and Human-Machine Teaming on September 9th
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us iTunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
