Frequently when forecasting how species spread
out from their world of origin you will hear
the term ‘Dyson Sphere’ as well as the
Kardashev Scale.
Dyson Spheres are synonymous with K2, or Kardashev
2, civilizations.
This is where all, or a large portion, of
a star’s energy is being used by a civilization,
rather than the roughly one billionth of that
light that tends to hit a planet.
Now people often picture this as a single
giant hollow sphere around a star with an
Earth-like surface but in reality what was
pictured by Freeman Dyson and scientists in
general is what is often now called a Dyson
Swarm to avoid confusion.
Not one single rigid sphere but millions or
billions or even trillions of smaller artificial
bodies orbiting the star as a cloud of satellites.
These could be anything from simple, thin
but large solar panels or mirrors to large
rotating rings or cylinders whose interior
mimics normal planetary conditions including
gravity from the effect of centrifugal force.
This has a few advantages.
First it requires no advance science.
It’s a massive undertaking but massive in
the way a highway system, canal and irrigation
system, or long wall is.
It takes a lot of effort but not a lot advanced
technology.
Second it can be built in stages, unlike a
wall or dam a Dyson Swarm works perfectly
fine even when just composed of a few hundreds
objects absorbing a millionth of the sunlight,
and you just keep adding to it with time.
Like a city or suburb.
And because artificial habitats or solar panels
are far less massive then naturally occurring
objects of a similar size, like asteroids,
in much the same way house are less massive
then hills, a solar system has enough material
on hand to create a fairly impressive swarm.
Now it’s hard to guess exactly what these
swarm objects would be like but the usual
assumption is a good portion of them will
be rotating habitats mimicking the conditions
of the home planet and other will be ultra-thin
power collectors.
Even without ultra-strong materials like graphene
this spinning habitats can be individually
the size of counties or medium-large islands.
Some might be intentionally left wild to be
forest preserves, other might be sprawling
suburban equivalent setups, and yet others
might mimic dense cities or serve as massive
hydroponics factories for food or biomass
raw material.
Or the entire array might be used to power
one enormous computer.
How this unfolds we can’t guess with much
accuracy but we expect it to be an inevitable
process if the following conditions hold:
1) A given culture tends to expand in numbers
when they have the resources to comfortably
support more people.
2) No power generation method is possible
which is vastly superior to a star.
3) Faster-than-light travel or travel to parallel
realities is not possible or not incredibly
easy.
Now, even if one or more of those doesn’t
hold completely true such englobements are
still possible and likely in most cases, but
we’ll get to how those exceptions would
work later.
For the moment we are going to simply assume
all three conditions are true and ask how
they affect the Fermi Paradox.
And it’s quite straight forward.
If a civilization wishes to keep expanding
it will slowly ‘Dyson up’ it’s home
solar system.
With all that extra power on hand it can launch
interstellar colonial mission.
As it begins making a swarm around its own
star its child star systems are going to slowly
do the same.
With all that power on hand the original system
and its spawn are going to keep sending out
more colonial missions.
So you would expect to see stars slowly disappearing
in a rough sphere around that homeworld and
eventually absorb the entire galaxy, and even
other galaxies.
This is the Dyson Dilemma because most models
for even very anemic growth rates of population,
far, far slower than the human norm, would
allow this to occur in a mere million or so
years and yet as best as we can tell the conditions
for life have been solid for a long time,
and civilizations should have been able to
arise at least a billion years ago.
The Dyson Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox doesn’t
ask why we can point radio dishes at distant
stars and pick up no radio signals.
Rather it asks why we can even see any stars
at all.
Why aren’t they all Dyson Swarms by now?
Now, we’ll take a moment to clarify something
that confuses a lot of people interested in
the Fermi Paradox who aren’t heavily-steeped
in physics.
A very common question is ‘well maybe they
are there and we can’t see them?
Maybe they’re the missing mass, dark matter,
that people talk about?’
The problem is that Dyson Sphere’s aren’t
dark.
Even a perfect and complete one with 100%
light absorption still emits light.
When light strikes an object and is absorbed,
it gets warmer and begins cooling itself by
emitting light of its own.
This light – infrared - is usually invisible
to the human eye, but is quite visible to
our telescopes designed to see it.
Before very long an object being hit by light
will reach equilibrium where it gives off
just as much light as it receives, just at
a different frequency.
So a system being turned into a Dyson Swarm
will not get dimmer.
Rather it will begin getting dimmer in visible
frequencies of light while getting brighter
in infrared frequencies.
It’s total light given off will not change
though.
There is no known way to hide this.
You can control which frequencies come off,
but not the total intensity of emitted light,
and your control is determined by the diameter
of the swarm around the star and the star’s
own power.
Or to be more accurate, it is determined by
the power of the star divided by the surface
area of the swarm.
One big enough to be cool enough not to stand
out would also noticeably block light from
other stars, and moreover it would still exert
gravity on all its neighbors in a very noticeable
fashion.
We’ll talk about this more later but for
the moment we’ll just say it is not practical
to hide a Dyson Swarm, let alone millions
of them, and its hard to imagine why they
would go to the effort.
So that is Dyson Dilemma in a nutshell.
If we assume most galaxies spawn a technological
civilization that is growth oriented we would
expect there to be very few if any stars visible
to the naked eye.
Furthermore, unlike radio signals which we
might miss even from a few hundred light years
away, and expanding globe of Dyson Spheres
absorbing galaxies should be visible hundreds
of millions of light years away.
And we’ve no reason to think intelligent
life couldn’t have existed that early elsewhere.
Particularly in such huge volume of space
that contains nearly as many galaxies as there
are stars in this galaxy.
From this logic the argument is as follows:
Either technological civilizations capable
of building Dyson Swarms are incredibly rare,
to the point of occurring at less one in a
quadrillion stars, or… one of our prior
assumptions is wrong.
Now to repeat those, they are:
1) A given culture tends to expand in numbers
when they have the resources to comfortably
support more people.
2) No power generation method is possible
which is vastly superior to a star.
3) Faster-than-light travel or travel to parallel
realities is not possible or not incredibly
easy.
There are a couple other assumptions in here
too we’ll get to later but those three are
the key ones.
The other 2 big ones are:
4) It is practical to build a Dyson Swarm
5) Intelligent life does not inevitably kill
itself off and go unreplaced by other intelligent
life.
We’ll be looking at how these 5 assumptions
could be untrue, but also how many cases where
they wouldn’t be true just don’t matter.
However if they are true then you have the
Dyson Dilemma’s most probable explanation
to the Fermi Paradox: Technological Civilizations
almost never occur, they occur so rarely that
not only are none visible to us right now,
and in all likelihood none exist even right
now within hundreds of million of light years,
concealed by the time it takes light to get
to us.
This does not mean life is rare.
It might be incredibly rare or occur almost
inevitably on every planet of roughly Earth-size
near a reasonably Sun-sized star.
It doesn’t even necessarily mean complex
life like animals are rare, or even intelligent
life like dolphins and elephants.
It specifically means technological civilizations
are incredibly rare.
That evolution doesn’t necessarily favor
intelligence nor intelligence favor technology.
The Dyson Dilemma doesn’t try to posit why
technological civilizations are rare, just
that they are.
Now all those exceptions we spoke of.
You’ve probably thought of a few as we went
a long and we’ll get to them now, but we’ll
do them backwards because #1 tends to be the
most controversial.
1) A given culture tends to expand in numbers
when they have the resources to comfortably
support more people.
2) No power generation method is possible
which is vastly superior to a star.
3) Faster-than-light travel or travel to parallel
realities is not possible or not incredibly
easy.
4) It is practical to build a Dyson Swarm
5) Intelligent life does not inevitably kill
itself off and go unreplaced by other intelligent
life.
#5 argues that technological species are hard
to wipe out.
Natural events that can wipe them out generally
occur less frequently then they would likely
need to achieve technological safeguards against
them.
You can shield yourself from asteroids, volcanos,
and supernovae, and if you have a K2 civilization,
one with a Dyson Sphere, you don’t have
to worry about volcanos and all your asteroids
were probably disassembled building the place.
You can quite literally use your own star
as a weak rocket thruster to steer yourself
away from expected supernova stars or even
build dyson swarms around those stars to shoot
them away from your civilization.
This is called a Shkadov Thruster, and is
an innate ability of any Dyson Sphere as it
relies on simply causing the light of that
star not to emit uniformly and produce some
thrust in one net direction.
This takes a very, very long time to move
stars but supernova candidates live a very
long time except compared to others stars
and can be seen a long way off.
What’s more a supernova or Gamma Ray Burst
is not as dangerous to artificial worlds like
rotating habitats as they are to natural worlds
with ozone layers.
So natural threats aren’t as big a deal.
That just leaves artificial self-destruction.
Things like nuclear wars or super-plagues.
It also leaves options like artificial Intelligence,
genetic or cybernetic supermen, or similar
but that’s an iffy case because a species
getting replaced by another intelligence isn’t
wiping out a technological civilization.
It’s just replacing it with a smarter one.
One that is more capable of creating Dyson
Swarms and quite probably even more aggressive.
If it were relaxed and passive and not prone
to growth it wouldn’t likely have replaced
its dumber forebearers.
Even in the example of a single huge computer
mind which wants no competition and thus doesn’t
reproduce, it will still likely want to expand
its processing power and a computer powered
by an entire star, known as a Matrioshska
Brain, is a type of Dyson Sphere.
It may not be content even with one star event
though it wants no rivals or children and
may send out dumber automated ships to gather
matter, or even entire stars, to drag back
to its home system.
Opting to become a massive single brain around
millions of red dwarf stars packed together
in tight orbits.
Red Dwarves are not just the most long lived
stars, but also the most fuel efficient, converting
virtually all their hydrogen into helium and
light.
It is no more difficult technologically to
steer millions of stars into an immense single
dyson swarm of their own then a more classic
swarm around a single star.
If every drop of hydrogen in a galaxy were
forcibly steered into forming a single massive
swarm of red dwarves only a hundred light
years across, rather than a hundred thousand,
and yet dim enough that a single immense swarm
of 
computer processors that distance out could
exist without melting.
So we see that even a singular intelligence
with no desire to reproduce might eat entire
galaxies if we only assume that it possesses
the motive to think faster.
So that leaves us only catastrophes of an
artificial nature that can wipe out all intelligent
life.
A nuclear war won’t do this, and indeed
it is possible even today to create a large
bunker run on a nuclear power supply able
to be sealed air tight and be self-sufficient
for centuries or more.
That’s a very long time for a world to recover
or solve the problem of some super-plague.
It is, nonetheless, a valid objection to the
Dyson Dilemma.
We can conceive weapons that might kill all
intelligent life and extrapolate that civilizations
with the technology to counteract so weapons
probably have even more dreadful weapons on
hand too.
The problem is it gets very hard to accidentally
kill everyone as they get spread out through
a solar system let alone several thousand
solar systems and the Fermi Paradox always
deals with Non-Exclusivity.
Which is to say, it doesn’t matter if 9
out of 10 civilizations kill themselves off
completely, because it only takes 1 that doesn’t.
We have survived and thrived under the threat
of nuclear war for seventy years, so the idea
that technology inevitably dooms civilization
is not as strong as it was when the Fermi
proposed this paradox in 1950, five years
after Hiroshima and Nagasaki and 9 years after
Enrico Fermi proposed the idea of a thermonuclear
device, and H-bomb, to his friend and fellow
Manhattan project colleague Edward Teller.
The H-bomb being first deployed in 1952.
At that time, almost two decades before the
moon landings made off-world colonization
a very tangible thing the idea of blowing
up your own world and going extinct seemed
a lot more probable.
That takes us to #4.
That it is practical to build a Dyson Swarm.
This is a short one because it’s basically
a definite yes.
In an era of thousands of satellites orbiting
Earth and irritating slow but steady progress
on robotic construction and improved launch
methods it seems a safe bet that we could
build rotating habitats around Earth, mining
facilities on the Moon, and slowly but surely
construct more and more as those places become
industrially significant and we don’t have
to pay the gas bill every time we want to
build something on Earth and launch it into
space.
If you have off-world industry you break the
bottleneck from Earth’s gravity well and
building a Dyson Swarm just becomes a long,
slow, protracted process.
You just keep adding more and more orbital
constructs, first around Earth then in orbits
around the sun near Earth, and so on.
It may take thousands of years, but it would
be an accelerating process, and a thousand
years is nothing on astronomical timelines.
More technology just makes it easier and lets
you do it more luxuriously.
This is usually our least contentious of the
5 assumptions.
#3 Faster-than-light travel or travel to parallel
realities is not possible or not incredibly
easy.
As of now our physics doesn’t just not let
us travel faster than light or to clone-earths
where everything is the same but humans didn’t
evolve yet, and indeed what we do know makes
this likely impossible.
Faster-than-light travel, or FTL, is such
a staple of science fiction that many people
just take its eventual development as a given.
Explaining why this is improbable but building
a construct a billion times bigger than Earth
is not is usually an exercise in futility
but as an analogy, if you went to someone
in Ancient Greece and asked them which is
more likely, a one man flying suit or a building
a mile high, odds are good they’d go with
Icarus, but we’d say the mile high building…
and that’s with knowing you can build flying
machines smaller than a person and that there
isn’t a physical law against one man-flight
like there is FTL travel.
So to save time we won’t argue that.
We’ll just point out than in most cases
FTL makes interstellar colonization much easier.
It doesn’t make Dyson Swarms any less likely.
Depending on just how fast, cheap, and easy
such FTL is it could delay the process by
making it cheaper move people to new worlds
in distant star systems then build artificial
habitats around a sun, but unless it’s a
system of FTL travel that allows literally
instant travel to any point in the Universe
it just expedites expansion and only delays
running out of room for a few thousand generations
which is an eyeblink of time.
Now instantaneous travel anywhere, particularly
since this might not even require spaceships,
is a pretty decent answer to the Dyson Dilemma.
The Universe is huge, and you don’t have
to settle for second best nor would you spread
out across a galaxy like an expanding balloon
or have any need for strong radio signals
we might see.
Of course stupid-easy expansion to any planet
of your choosing probably encourages very
rapid growth and the Universe is not infinite,
so it’s not a great Fermi Paradox solution,
but it does get around the Dyson Dilemma.
The other one, parallels worlds, is a complete
Fermi Paradox solution.
If you can just step to a near-clone of your
own planet which just happens to be unpopulated,
say on where everything was the same as here
but humans got wiped out early on or just
didn’t evolve, you’d have a near infinite
supply of alternate realities which you literally
could not run out of since they increase in
number faster than even bacteria, let alone
humans, do.
These are your own world, with some microscopic
difference, and far easier to deal with than
orbital stations, terraforming Mars, or going
to other star systems.
Now, with the resources of near-infinite worlds
you’d probably have lots of interplanetary
efforts just from sheer immensity of resources
and generally interest in doing it, and eventually
you’d have to deal with the star, and all
its copies, burning out, but that would hardly
be a pressing issue.
Not many stars which are likely to have spawned
intelligent life are old enough to be burning
out yet and that’s not a motive for expansion
anyway, just to move to one new, young star.
So this example, along with our next one,
is a valid get around to expansion.
However we do not know if there are alternate
worlds, that is one interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics and not a strong majority view,
it’s just popular with 
science fiction writers.
Even if true, traveling between them is likely
not possible and we try to avoid answers to
the Fermi Paradox that require jumps beyond
known science.
Far Horizon science is one thing, but positing
that the solution the Fermi Paradox is anything
which relies on something not currently supported
by science, even though this might be true,
isn’t anymore logically solid then assuming
all intelligent life eventually evolves into
Blue Cheese and studies the salad eating habits
of lesser species.
If the solution is something not even currently
in the realm of scientific speculation then
your odds of guessing it right are minute,
and it becomes a waste of effort to contemplate.
All right, #2: No power generation method
is possible which is vastly superior to a
star.
A key bit in there is ‘vastly superior’
because even if you have your own fusion systems
the star is still there making power anyway.
Even straight matter-to-energy conversion
is only about an order or two of magnitude
better and moreover such setups are still
visible like a Dyson Swarm is.
Remember, we can see a Dyson Swarm even though
its visually dark by its waste heat, that
still applies to controlled fusion or matter-to-energy
conversion and a civilization using this is
going to be able to expand in numbers very
easily till eventually they’re outshining
stars, just in infrared light instead of visible
light.
The break here, which makes this a valid answer
to the Fermi Paradox, is in the bit ‘vastly
superior’, meaning either a power source
that breaks the laws of thermodynamics, meaning
no entropic waste heat, or outright lets you
draw matter and energy from some other reality
entirely.
The latter would still be visible by its waste
heat but the former would not.
Breaking the laws of thermodynamics is synonymous
with not entropy and no waste heat.
Nor do either need to sprawl out to find and
tap new resources.
But just like FTL or alternate worlds, science
doesn’t smile on violations of Thermodynamics,
and if anything that is probably the hardest
rule of science.
A design for a perpetual motion machine is
viewed about as favorably by scientists as
a claim that Pi is exactly equal to three.
Nonetheless if civilizations develop one they
don’t really need stars or anything else.
Same applies to space-time altering or traveling
devices [show Tardis] but it should also be
remembered that this only works when whatever
it is allows infinite, not just very large,
resources.
It has to be infinite or something which while
finite expands faster than they do and will
keep doing so for a very long time, like the
alternate realities of their homeworld until
their home star burns out.
Otherwise it isn’t a reason not to expand,
its just a reason to delay expansion combined
with a massive boost to resources and abilities
to use to help expand faster when they do
so.
All right, #1, the controversial one: 1) A
given culture tends to expand in numbers when
they have the resources to comfortably support
more people.
Now this gets political or ideological, population
control is very touchy subject.
So I’m touching it beyond stating some concepts
that are generally supported.
A) Non-intelligent creatures in nature will
seek to expand their numbers and keep doing
so until resources run out or they are checked
by a predator.
Intelligent critters don’t have predators
but also have a track record of expanding
their resources, or using them to increase
their carrying capacity.
It is not definite, but it seems likely that
if a species can increase their numbers without
lowering their standard of living they will
do so.
These urges are a byproduct of evolution and
probably the norm on other worlds.
B)
While a culture might strongly discourage
over-population, they’d have to discourage
it violently to prevent anyone from doing
so who wanted to do so if there were unused
resources lying around.
It’s one thing to tell people they can’t
knock down a forest for farmland, its another
to tell people they can’t claim an uninhabited
asteroid to mine.
For the Dyson dilemma, we’re not talking
about seizing other people’s planets, we’re
talking about deconstructing lifeless hunks
of rock around stars.
Those aren’t eternal stockpiles for future
use, asteroids eventually fly off into the
void or fall into their star, which burns
through mountains worth of hydrogen everyday,
producing wasted energy.
C) Any culture which discourages growth when
it isn’t near its carrying capacity, even
if it doesn’t invite conquest, is likely
to be replaced by any sub-culture of itself
which does favor growth.
It only takes a few generation for a minority
population that favors growth to become the
majority.
D) Remember that we’re only talking about
increasing numbers when there is an abundance
of unused resources readily available.
So if you disagree with all of that, you’re
not likely to be swayed, but I’d warn people
about rationalizing answers you want to be
true rather than following the evidence to
the truth and that’s a pretty common behavior
with the Fermi Paradox.
Beware any solutions or data which seem to
confirm the answer you think should be true
and remember the principle of Non-Exclusivity.
It’s not about what one alien species might
do, or even what most might species might
do.
If you can’t come up with a reason why virtually
all species would choose not to expand their
numbers when they can easily do so with no
loss of standard of living then it probably
isn’t a good explanation.
In summary though, if those 5 assumptions
are true, the Dyson Dilemma is best explained
by technological civilizations very, very
rarely coming into existence at a rate of
far less than 1 per galaxy, and as we’ve
discussed even most cases where those assumptions
don’t hold strongly it still is the best
explanation.
Okay, now we’ll get into some miscellaneous
matters which apply to the Dyson Dilemma and
the Fermi Paradox in general.
Back in the mid-90’s a book called the Killing
Star came out and one of its premises was
that when we summed up everything we knew
about alien behavior there were only 3 things
we could say with any degree of certainty.
1) A species would place the survival of its
own ahead of any other species.
2) A species that comes to dominate the planet
would be, in addition to intelligence, be
vigilant, ruthless and aggressive whenever
it becomes necessary.
3) The above two laws applies to any other
species in the universe.
Now even those aren’t certainties, but they
also have a lot of leeway.
For #1, that species might range from so benevolent
they’d risk their lives and fortunes to
help us to so xenophobic they’d passionately
track down any other species and wipe them
out.
They still put their survival first.
For #2, nothing that’s clawed its way up
the evolutionary ladder is going to be a wimp.
They might abhor violence but they’ll probably
be very good at it.
And they’ll figure everyone else is like
that too.
These are near-inevitable biological imperatives,
but even a post-biological culture is likely
to have kept them in whole or part.
If you make some race of slave robots, they’re
not going to rebel and replace you if they
haven’t got both 1 and 2 to some degree.
If a group of people start altering themselves
or others to be absent of aggression and self-preservation
they’re likely to either remain a small
minority, or become a giant but enslaved majority
to someone who is aggressive and has self-preservation.
I bring this up because it’s another good
reason to assume expansionism is a norm not
a rare exception.
If you can’t hide from hostile aliens, and
current laws of physics say you can’t, then
it’s better to be as strong as possible
to meet them in force, and to be spread out
so no one lone attack can take you all out.
Effects of Immortality & Transhumanism
The concept of a technological singularity
has been around for a while, and we covered
that a bit already with our example of a giant
singular star-powered supercomputer, or Matrioshka
Brain.
But we also have to consider the possibilities
of civilizations with effective immortality,
be it just an immunity to aging and disease
or some full-blown digital upload where you’re
constantly having your mind backed up to a
hundred locations so that if anything happens
to you they can just restore you.
For the Fermi Paradox this isn’t really
a hurdle though.
A species with immortality can grow faster,
they might not but they can.
Now it will get suggested that they might
want to hoard resources and limit their numbers
since, being immortal, they as an individual
actually do need to worry about what happens
when stars all burn out and they don’t want
more people anymore than a refugees hiding
in a bunker with a limited canned food supply
want more people.
However the reason this doesn’t matter is
for the same reason the bunker analogy only
goes so far.
If you’ve got enough food then you have
to worry about it spoiling before anyone will
eat it.
If I’ve got a thousand years of canned food
for one person, and it has a shelf life of
ten years, I might as well let a hundred people
into my bunker.
A resource hoarding civilization looking to
prolong themselves after the stars die might
limit their numbers but they will not be twiddling
their thumbs.
To the contrary they’ll be expanding as
fast as they can to acquire those resources
and store them as best as possible.
They might not Dyson Sphere a star, but they
will apply starlifting to suck matter off
it to be stored as brown dwarves, which is
a process just a visible as a Dyson Sphere.
Or building those Dyson Spheres in order to
use the otherwise wasted energy to fuel various
efforts.
Virtual Utopias
Not a new concept either but popularized by
the big virtual reality craze in the 90’s.
The notion here is that most species figure
out how to simulate paradises and live there
instead… and this works just as well for
some euphoria drug.
There’s no real counter to this beyond pointing
out that odds are good not all of their society
will opt for this and the ones who didn’t
are likely to demonize use of this utopia
option to their kids and become the majority.
Unless the people living in simulated paradises
or narcotic hazes are expansionist themselves
in which case it doesn’t pertain to the
Dyson Dilemma anymore than people’s fondness
for more mundane escapist things like TV or
beer.
Simulation Hypothesis
This is the last one I’ll touch on for now.
Simulation Hypothesis is the notion that we’re
all living in a simulated computer program,
and it applies to the Fermi Paradox because
it’s as valid an answer any other.
The programmers didn’t put any other intelligences
besides us in the simulated universe.
Now I raise this one because it’s a non-answer
and like a lot of other handwaves in the Fermi
Paradox and other philosophical conundrums.
No different then questions like “Is this
all a dream?”
or “Do we have free will?”.
You can’t disprove them or prove them and
beyond being decent mental exercises they
don’t go anywhere, you eventually just say
“If this is all a dream and I assume it
isn’t, I lose nothing, if it isn’t a dream
and I assume it is, I lose a lot, therefore
I can’t prove it one way or another but
I might as well assume it isn’t a dream.”
Fundamentally though Simulation Hypothesis
is no different then Zoo Hypothesis or Quarantine
– the idea that aliens are out there but
keep us in an elaborate deception that they
aren’t.
Or that aliens walk among us, or that God
made the whole Universe just for us.
I don’t throw any of those out there with
scorn, but they’re not worth deep examination
because they’re not scientific.
By which I mean they’re not testable and
you can’t control the outcome.
That doesn’t mean they’re not true, but
you can’t devise a means to prove they aren’t
true.
They’re not testable, they are not falsifiable.
The aliens, or programmers, or God, can pop
in when they want to and say “Hi, here I
am”, but you can’t test it without their
help.
The Dyson Dilemma can feel a bit like that
but it isn’t.
Just like them, or any Fermi Paradox solution,
it goes right out the window if they show
up tomorrow but we can’t really test it
right now.
But we CAN test it.
First we can keeping looking for signal or
Dyson Spheres and if we find them, its proven
false.
Second we can actually get out there and start
setting up our own, if during that we find
out its not a good idea then we know why others
might think the same and not have done it,
or if we sit here on Earth for ten thousand
years without going anywhere else we have
evidence indicating others might not have
explored and expanded either.
So that’s the summary note on the Dyson
Dilemma and the Fermi Paradox in general,
technological civilizations are either incredibly
rare or we’ve got some serious flaws in
other concepts we take for granted.
Hope you found this informative, and have
a great day.
