This Episode is sponsored by Skillshare
Many a good and great thing has risen from
the ashes after fire consumed what came before.
It is possible our Universe may be one such
example, destined to be torn apart in the
fiery birth of a successor.
So today we are returning to our Civilizations
at the End of Time series to discuss the Big
Rip, one potential scenario for how our Universe
might end.
In our earlier episodes, Black Hole Farming
and Iron Stars, we were contemplating how
civilizations could survive even after all
the stars in the Universe had burned out,
many trillions of years from now.
This is the fate of the Universe in scenarios
such as Heat Death or Proton Decay that slowly
run the clock out as the Universe expands
and cools and entropy wears us out.
The Big Rip goes a very different way, by
pulling the Universe apart even faster than
it currently expands, and eventually escalating
those expansion forces – what we call dark
energy or phantom energy in some cases – until
they are so powerful they can rip whole atoms
apart, not just galaxies.
Which might seem like a somewhat peculiar
comment if you’re not already familiar with
dark energy and Hubble Expansion, given that
ripping atoms or their nuclei apart should
be easier than ripping apart entire galaxies,
which is certainly true.
So we’ll explain that today too.
Now for those familiar with Hubble Expansion,
odds are you have heard of the Big Rip scenario
before, even if just in sensationalist headlines
about the Universe being destroyed in 20 billion
years.
Now the 20 billion year figure – as we’ll
explain in a moment – is entirely pulled
out of a hat, we have no reason to expect
it would be that particular timeline.
Indeed it could be shorter, or it could be
longer.
The paper originally discussing this matter
had a range of values for a constant we do
not know the value for, and they picked the
number -1.5 presumably for being rather round
and demonstrating the concept.
Plugging a value of -1.5 into the equation
results in a doomsday about 20 billion years
from now.
A different value would give a different timeline,
and most probable figures definitely tilt
to longer timelines.
Now 20 billion years is still a huge chunk
of time, about half again as long as the universe
has already been around, but it’s very different
than the thousands of times longer it takes
for us to run out of stars or the trillions
of trillions of times even that which we envision
for Black Hole based civilizations.
Needless to say civilizations preparing for
a doomsday so wildly different will behave
differently.
As a quick example, the Big Rip is one of
the End-Universe scenarios that offers some
hope of a Recycled Universe, akin to the Big
Bang & Big Crunch repeating scenario, and
a civilization that thought it was going to
be obliterated in the recreation of a new
Universe whose fate is the same is very likely
to be a lot more into cyclic time philosophies.
Now we are interested in how such civilizations
would behave if this fate of the Universe
was the correct prediction, but to do that
we need to first discuss how it functions,
as it's not simply a moment of random obliteration.
So let’s start at the beginning, the Big
Bang.
We have a tendency to say the whole Universe
began from a single point that exploded outwards
but we do not know that, we know that our
Observable Universe seems to have come from
something very tiny.
It is quite possible the Universe is infinite
in size and was all the way back at the Big
Bang, just our portion of it was not.
Our Observable Universe is finite and came
from another finite and vastly smaller bit.
Light from other areas will never reach us
as a result of the Universe getting bigger;
faster than that light can travel, but that
doesn’t mean it's not there.
Of course it also doesn’t mean it is there,
we just don’t know, and this isn’t a controversial
idea, it just doesn’t get discussed much
as essentially something we can’t determine
at this time.
It can bug folks sometimes though because
if you say the Universe began infinite-size,
people can get confused how it can continue
expanding.
The simple answer is that infinity is not
a number, and infinity plus infinity is still
infinity but it is a bigger infinity.
Infinity plus one equals infinity too, but
those two infinities are not equal, again
infinity isn’t a number.
If you’re having problems seeing how two
infinites could be different in size, consider
that if you count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 etc you could
keep counting on to infinity, but that in
between each of those integers there are more
numbers, 1.2, 2.2, 3.14159, and an infinite
number between each.
Nonetheless all the numbers between 1 and
2, if added up, are smaller than the sum of
all integers or the sum of all numbers between
9 and 10.
So too, a 1 dimensional line might be infinitely
long, but an area infinitely long and infinitely
wide is still bigger, as would be a volume
infinitely tall, wide, and long.
So again, infinity is not a number and essentially
wrecks any finite calculations.
It also tends to wreck logical constructs,
something we looked at more in our episode
“Things Which Will Never Exist”, because
people will try to use it as a number, and
since the transitive property of equality
says that if A equals B and B equals C, then
C equals A, then if A equals infinity and
C equals infinity, why, A must equal C. Which
is why I’m emphasizing this, because it
results in bad logic like taking a perfect
square and a perfect circle and saying the
square equals the circle since they both equal
perfect.
So an infinite thing that came from expansion
as a point like object isn’t really possible,
no matter how fast it expanded it still would
never get to infinity, and for this reason
if we lived in an infinite universe it would
have been infinite back to the big bang too,
but that it was smaller in the past, if still
infinite, with each current chunk of it having
come from a tiny early section.
Now you might be wondering while we are dwelling
on that, and it’s because a lot of prior
models of the Universe and Eschatology – the
study of end times – tend to have to do
a lot of extrapolating around infinity at
some point and often get screwed up or misinterpreted
as a result.
For instance, for most of humanity’s modern
period the scientific consensus was that the
Universe always was around and was infinite
in size, and this was extrapolated from Newton’s
theory of universal gravity, since an infinitely
big Universe seemed the only way to avoid
everything collapsing from gravity.
This was at odds with the Dark Sky Paradox,
or Olbers’ Paradox, and our understanding
of Thermodynamics, but it persisted for a
few centuries until the Big Bang Model.
See Jade from Up and Atom’s episode on that
Paradox for an explanation of its importance
and eventual solution.
We might chuckle at that Paradox existing
for centuries with that theory of the Universe,
insisting on a theory even when it is blatantly
contradicted by other known science, but this
is often necessary in science.
Apparent paradoxes with other scientific principles
are not a reason to throw a model out in and
of itself.
For instance, we found that the Universe – the
part we can see anyway – was expanding,
and in recent years we’ve found that the
expansion seems to be accelerating – this
is where the Big Rip comes in, but it's also
where Dark Energy comes in and critically,
we have no idea where Dark Energy comes from.
One of our laws in physics is conservation
of energy, that it can be neither created
nor destroyed, merely changed in form.
However, spacetime itself takes energy to
exist, so when new bits of it get added, that
takes energy, energy that doesn’t seem to
come from anywhere, hence why we call it Dark
Energy, dark in the context of being mysterious
in function and origin.
Amusingly while Conservation of Energy is
often stated as ironclad law I doubt anyone
is still living who actually learned that
law while physicists believed it was without
exception, as its been about a century since
the Big Bang and Hubble Expansion hit the
scene.
So our observations are that the Universe
is expanding, with new bits of space popping
up everywhere in between things, and we usually
assume the new pockets are about a Planck
Volume, a teeny-tiny bit of space smaller
to an atom than an atom is to a planet, and
these new pockets randomly appear everywhere,
we assume, even inside you or I. Normally
this is irrelevant, they don’t pop up so
often that the forces holding us together
even notice them, but the forces binding atoms
are something like a trillion, trillion, trillion
times stronger than gravity.
Gravity only has an attractive force though,
so while other forces all mostly neutralize
out at large distances, gravity remains entirely
attractive, pulling things together.
However if new space is arriving out of nowhere
all over the place, then the effective strength
of gravity is going to weaken the further
away something is.
Not simply because gravity weakens with the
square of distance between objects, but because
that actual distance, if you think of a graviton
flying at light speed to an object to exchange
gravity with it, will have more and more new
bits of space between those two objects for
it to pass through first.
As a result, dark energy expansion has no
real effect at the planetary or interplanetary
scale, and indeed is barely measurable at
the interstellar scale.
But by the time you get to the galactic scale
it begins getting competitive with gravity
and at the intergalactic scale begins dominating
things, until new space is emerging between
galaxies faster than gravity can pull them
together.
Now the big question is how fast this new
space occurs, or its rate.
And I think we should note that the reason
why we usually discuss this as the velocity
of galaxies moving from us based on their
distance – approximately 70 kilometers per
second per megaparsec – if we are talking
about new volumes of space emerging, the value
should really be in terms of those new volumes,
Planck volumes or reality pixels, emerging
per second.
Which would also raise the question of if
that was a flat figure for the whole Universe,
say a billion cubic meters per second, or
for a given region, a billion cubic meters
per cubic light year.
Because for the former, the rate that the
diameter of the Universe expanded would actually
slow over time, if you want to make a sphere
10 times wider you need 10 cubed or one thousand
times more volume, but to get it twenty times
wider would take 20 cubed or 8000 times the
volume, so its diameter would take 8 times
longer to expand from 10 to 20 as it would
for getting to 10, if the rate of volume increase
was constant, like a balloon expanding as
water filled it from a tap at a set rate.
On the other hand, if each cubic light year
got the same fixed growth, then each time
you add a new cubic light year, you’d get
another billion cubic meters per second added
to your universal volume, an accelerating
increase in volume.
Folks often wonder why the Big Bang didn’t
instantly collapse into a black hole, or indeed
do so at any point in those first millions
of years when its overall density and mass
was high enough to count as an event horizon.
There’s a number of reasons this wouldn’t
matter by the way, for instance in an infinite
Universe, everything pulls every direction
– this was the reasoning for it in the Newtonian
Steady State Universe Model – but also if
you had the new bits of space emerging at
a steady rate for the whole Universe, then
when it was really tiny it would be expanding
ridiculously rapidly compared to the current
volume of the Universe and prevent such collapses.
Black Holes being ripped apart by Dark Energy
expansion is a thing to keep in mind for discussion
later today too.
Now we don’t actually know how this new
space is being added, but we can determine
the current rate and for instance we know
it is not a static amount being added to the
Observable Universe since again that would
cause a faster earlier expansion slowing with
time.
We observe nothing like that, and rather apparently
the reverse.
So if it were some gaping hole to another
dimension that energy or space was flooding
from, it would have to be one that was getting
wider over time, so to speak.
And we have a tendency to assume Dark Energy
comes from somewhere, energy being neither
created nor destroyed, so the idea it is leaking
in from some other place makes sense.
Such a place could run out over time, or it
could be a tiny hole that got poked that caused
the big bang and which has been getting ripped
wider by the passage of all that Dark Energy
as time went on, causing an accelerating expansion,
like a hole in a dyke or dam ripping wider
and flooding, though in such a case the flood
stop eventually as water runs out or equilibrium
is achieved.
In such an analogy, dark energy floods in
ever faster but eventually slows or stops.
Alternatively, it could just be that the energy
comes from nowhere at all and we’re just
wrong to assume energy needs to be conserved
universally, depending on how one defines
the Universe or sum total of reality.
That’s an example of a mental bias that
could blind us to figuring it out, after all,
time presumably comes from somewhere too,
if space and time and energy are all correlated,
but we don’t really ask if time is leaking
in from other dimensions or has a set number
that will drain out of the hourglass and leave
the Universe in a frozen instant when it does…
which it might.
All of which is a good reminder that when
it comes to understanding the fundamental
layers of reality, we still have a lot of
work to do.
But in the current state of play, it appears
that if we picked a pair of galaxies separated
by a megaparsec or a few million light years,
that they would have about 70 kilometers of
new space forming between them every second,
nowadays.
But if we jumped back in time a few billion
years and looked at two other galaxies separated
by that same megaparsec, the amount of new
space emerging every second would have been
less, and in the future we think it would
be more.
Note, this is the space appearing for each
megaparsec of distance, we are not talking
about how the rate of expansion will increase
as those galaxies move further apart, which
they do, but that the fundamental new amount
of space being created in any volume of the
Universe is rising too.
We don’t know for sure yet, and so we definitely
do not know the rate yet, but we can treat
it as a sort of an analogy for a big balloon
expanding under pressure inside as we fill
it with some gas or fluid, and for a perfect
fluid we have an equation of state, discussing
the expansion of that balloon or volume based
on that fluid’s pressure and density.
We call that w, lowercase, and its dimensionless,
no units of meters or megaparsecs or anything,
and in this case the Cosmological Equation
of State is that expansion divided by the
energy density of the universe – the latter
being what generates the gravity tugging things
back together, energy not mass is what generates
gravity, mass just happens to be the regular
dense type of energy we see yanking on things.
Our current observations place this cosmological
constant as w being about -1 and the Universe
will be accelerating in expansion for any
case where w is less than -1/3, and for instance
if w = -1/3 then we do have deal with magnetic
monopoles, a topic for another time.
Now an accelerating Universe is very different
than a Big Rip Universe, because for the Big
Rip scenario, which often introduces the notion
of Phantom Energy in addition to Dark Energy,
what we see is an unchecked increase in the
rate at which new space is emerging in any
given volume.
So it keeps rising until eventually new bits
of space are constantly emerging between stars
so fast that galaxies fall apart, not just
galaxies floating away from each other.
But it does not stop there, because this force
will continue rising till it's so strong compared
to gravity that even planets have new space
emerging between them and their sun too quick
for gravity to hold them together.
But then it will continue, until gravity can’t
even hold planets together.
Now gravity is very weak compared to other
forces but eventually this should rise until
even molecules are being ripped apart by it.
Then perhaps electrons ripped from around
nuclei, then nuclei ripped apart.
Things get a bit iffier here though, because
the strong nuclear force binding nuclei and
quarks together doesn’t act like electromagnetism
and gravity do, where it gets weaker with
distance.
The force, or glue, holding a pair of quarks
together is more like a spring or resistance
band, the harder you pull on it, the harder
it pulls back, and it only breaks when you’ve
put enough energy into that tug to generate
two new quarks with two new gluons binding
them together.
This leads to one possible case of a Recycled
Universe, as each new place becomes a source
for a wellspring of new matter, though this
is rather problematic as a ‘new big bang’
since the conditions wouldn’t be quite like
the original big bang state.
The fact that it's occurring all over the
Universe, not a single point, is not problematic
though for the reasons stated earlier about
how an infinite Universe can keep expanding
even as finite bits of it could expand, and
that doesn’t imply that the Universe in
its entirety was ever point-like, just our
Observable chunk of it.
Now we don’t really understand Dark Energy,
Phantom Energy, Quantum Gravity, or Quarks
well enough to know if this constant re-rip
of quark pairs spawning new matter might be
possible, but we also don’t know what comes
below the quark level, if anything.
However we potentially get spacetime itself
being ripped apart by these new bits of space
time which can present some other Big Bang-like
recycling.
Now, this happening in only 20 billions years
is, as I said earlier, entirely the result
of picking a value of w = -1.5, Big Rip scenarios
occur for any value of w being less than -1.
At a value of exactly -1 the equation for
the time till the Big Rip has zero in denominator,
resulting in an infinite time till the Rip,
while a value of -2 would make it happen in
just 10 billions years.
And at -10, more like a billion years.
Alternatively for w = -1.1 the time to the
rip is 100 billion years, and for w = -1.01
it is a trillion years, a long time but still
inside the period we would expect star formation
to still be occurring strongly.
For w = -1.001, it would rise to 10 trillion
years, and so on.
The equation is on screen if you want to play
with it, and as you can see this also varies
with the current density of all matter in
the Universe, Omega-sub-M, which they used
as 0.3 in that original paper.
The higher that number, the longer till Big
Rip too, it’s the portion of the universe
that is matter rather than Dark Energy.
The bad news is that our current values put
that number as .27 plus or minus .04, so anywhere
from .23 to .31, rather than .3, which tilts
toward a quicker Big Rip, though the effect
is minimal.
Now we still don’t know what value w is,
the Chandra X-Ray Observatory put it at -0.991,
for instance, which is bigger than -1, which
again was our cut off for a big rip.
So if our interpretation of the Chandra data
is correct, the Big Rip will never be happening,
however our current value for w is -1 plus
or minus .08, anywhere from -.92 to -1.08,
maybe even exactly -1, and the high end value
of that range of options is closer to a hundred
billion years, not 20, with most values being
much longer and half being never.
As a sidenote, if this constant is changeable
it might be locally changeable, which might
be a technology that civilizations would pursue
to keep themselves in isolated pockets of
stable space.
Or the reverse, to either serve as a power
plant or weapon, which would make it a lot
like the MD device from Ender’s Game that
makes big chunks of matter, like planets,
explode as all the forces holding their particles
together get unglued.
Incidentally this is a very avalanche effect,
for big rips, as the speed it goes up at just
keeps climbing as the density of dark energy
compared to matter rises.
What this means is that when the end comes,
it comes quick, though how quickly depends
on how quick the Rip is happening in general.
In the fastest scenario I’ve seen presented,
the Milky Way would still take tens of millions
of years to dissolve into scattered stars
redshifting away like the galaxies are doing
currently, but in that same model the Earth
would stay glued to the Sun through all of
that and only be ripped away months before
the end, and we’d keep the Moon till only
a few days out.
The Sun would explode about a half an hour
before doomsdays, and Earth and the other
planets shortly after.
Folks in spaceships or rotating habitats would
have a few more minutes before those ripped
apart, and themselves a few moments later.
Whether or not quarks explode at this point
into more quarks or spacetime rips apart into
new big bangs or a bunch of other scenarios
depends on many things we still don’t know,
it would seem to be rather academic to the
folks living in it though.
It is nice to imagine that your civilization
being ripped apart to atomic dust might form
the tapestry of a new Universe, or new epoch,
but if you can’t witness it, then it's not
that cheering.
Now one could point out that our ancestors
didn’t get to see the civilization we built
either, but they had continuity with us, there’s
no continuity to a new Big Bang or recycling
event.
So a Big Rip might come before we get to point
of star formation ceasing but probably not
by more than an order of magnitude, which
would normally be cheering, except in this
series we discuss ways to make civilizations
living in the expected trillion year period
of natural star formation seem like mayflies
compared to those dwelling around black holes.
Which also raises the question of what the
Big Rip does to black holes, which is undecided,
but a couple of interesting notes on that.
First, time slows down near black holes and
by a lot more the closer you get to them.
It does NOT freeze at the event horizon, that’s
a common misconception, the frozen moment
would be down in the singularity at the core,
if that exists, but the rate of time slows
increasingly as you get nearer to the core.
Now we don’t really know much about Dark
Energy yet but it would seem plausible that
it does relate to local time passage, so that
a pocket of space that is relatively slower
might also be expanding slower too, and that
the dark energy rate might be accelerating
slower as well.
This would imply dark energy expansion occurred
slighter more in the intergalactic void than
deep inside galaxies where time runs just
a bit slower, so is testable if we get good
enough with our astronomy.
That’s very speculative but it’s part
of the reason we can’t really say what the
Big Rip would do to a black hole.
If true one could imagine a narrow window
in which civilizations might have; to duck
into the event horizons of supermassive black
holes, just barely under, and wait for Dark
Energy to rip them free of it, and return
them to a regenerated Universe.
Now, beyond assuming that this quark or sub-quark
ripping event triggers a stop to allow new
Universes, this would normally fail as an
option for Fermi Paradox reasons.
It’s implying every 100 billion years or
trillions years or whatever we have these
big resets, Big Rip Epochs, in a cycle.
If someone can survive to the end of Big Rip
Epoch and into another, then we have little
reason to assume we represent Epoch 1, in
what is implied to be an infinite cycle, so
where are the survivors of prior universes?
Since we don’t see them, then presumably
survival is not possible using this or some
parallel technique of forting up for the storm.
This is another reason for the long cosmology
lecture to start things, because the flaw
here is that there is no cycle going on.
It’s assuming the Universe expands and basically
every so often divides into huge numbers of
new Universes in fiery eruptions, not that
our Universe re-emerges from some single point.
So the folks sheltering in some black hole,
or some artificial space-pocket-fort here
on Earth, are entering into a new Universe
in which the scattered atoms of even our own
Moon are already far, far away, from this
new Universe they are erupting into before
it begins its own expansion.
So you only exist in a Universe – in the
Observable Hubble Volume sense – with a
precursor civilization from before the last
Bang/Rip, if by freak coincidence your Big
Bang was in one of the spots a civilization
was sheltering, which is insanely unlikely,
especially in a Big Rip Cosmology where huge
amounts of new space time are flooding into
things even compared to normal expansion we
see nowadays in our mostly empty Universe.
Critical notion there is that it's not a cycle
or reset, it's either a total end or a constant
expansion and regeneration, albeit the kind
only allowing Phoenix-like resurrections,
or the Quantum kind we discussed in Iron Stars,
infinite times permit infinite random reincarnation,
see our episode Infinite Improbability Issues
to understand the seeming insanity of that.
We also always have to come back to the big
question of why there is dark energy, where
it comes from, if anywhere, and why it is
increasing.
If it's external, then it could run out or
is coming from some infinite source of power
beyond the veil of perceptible reality.
Civilizations might be able to figure this
out, and that doesn’t just allow scenarios
for survival, but actually taking advantage
of it.
I mentioned the Fermi Paradox a bit ago and
one solution Dark Energy and Big Rips potentially
allow is that we don’t see alien empires
everywhere because they tap Dark Energy for
power rather than stars and they can use that
power to craft new spacetime or universes,
rather than going out to colonize their own
native galaxy.
Now these are various scenarios for surviving
this catastrophe, but what if civilizations
determine that it cannot be done and the whole
Universe is going to self-destruct in 100
billions years?
First, we shouldn’t assume they’re instantly
going to become a civilization that views
time cyclically or gives up on concepts like
purpose.
Let’s be honest, nobody really thinks of
their civilizations in million year terms
and the day to day effect on civilization
of us adopting the Steady State Universe model
for a few centuries then burying it for the
Big Bang and Heat Death version has basically
been zero.
Finding out the world will end in 4 billion
years changes little to us, and nobody really
cares when we modify that to maybe a billion
years instead for the oceans and air to evaporate
off as the Sun warms up.
So too, the Civilizations at the End of time
series is my most popular, with millions of
views, and we’ve discussed ways to save
Earth from either fate and last for eons beyond,
but nobody has suggested we enact new policy
or culture around this option, myself included.
So we should not assume civilizations faced
with a Big Rip billions of years from now
are culturally impacted by it too much.
That said, they obviously aren’t pursuing
the hyper-long term strategies we have looked
at elsewhere in this series.
You don’t go around making sub-stellar mass
black holes as long term deposits for your
civilization to draw energy from in the dark
epoch after the last stars burn out.
Indeed no black hole in excess of a gigaton,
with a lifespan of 1.5 trillion years, would
seem to make sense as a Hawking Radiation
Power Plant, and at 356 Megawatts, they are
already rather low powered for most interesting
applications.
Of course you hardly care about most types
of waste at this point, ultra-cold computation
for post-biological lifeforms loses much of
its appeal, as do any strategies that are
aiming for maximum collection of mass and
energy for long term and slow use.
The Universe is ending in 20 billion years
or 100 or whichever, why build with trillions
of years in mind, let alone trillions of trillions
of trillions?
However, we should not extrapolate that out
too far.
We are still talking about billions of years,
implying civilizations that need to appreciate
efficiency.
But it does have some implications.
As an example, some internally lit O’Neill
Cylinder of 100,000 people and 1000 square
kilometers of living area still needs something
like a gigawatt of power provided by fusion
or black hole generator, so it’s burning
through a kilogram of matter per year for
that black hole generator and more like one
a week for fusion fuel.
That builds up as a supply need in the long
term, but that habitat masses somewhere around
a gigaton minimum and equal mass of fuel reserves,
for a gigaton, would last for billions of
years on fusion fuel and something like a
trillion years for a black hole generator,
and the latter runs on any matter, whereas
even deuterium based fusion still runs on
a material a lot more abundant than all the
materials that habitat is built out of.
So they simply have no reason to worry about
energy concerns.
It also affects intergalactic colonization
scenarios, because if the whole Universe is
ending in 20 billion years, you don’t bother
sending ships out to some place they won’t
reach for 20 billion years.
Additionally, when it comes to colonizing
distant galaxies, your maximum reach is essentially
any galaxy whose red shift is decently less
than your maximum engine speed.
However, if the rate of expansion is accelerating
a ton, then that colonial reach needs adjusted
even further downward.
I suspect it would still be profitable to
go after stars even a billion light years
away, but not much further, and moreover,
only profitable as new territory, because
you wouldn’t be able to return with galaxies’
worth of new material like we contemplated
in our Episode Fleet of Stars, nor could you
afford to wait the billions of years for its
arrival.
Now you might still bring a lot of mass into
one place, especially if your models show
any advantage to slowing local time or if
a higher local matter to dark energy ratio
helps prolong things.
Things like Planets built around artificial
smaller black holes already have plenty of
advantages as do ones built around normal
or supermassive black holes, what we call
Birch Planets, which can be composed of many
concentric shells, each many trillions of
times larger than Earth in living area.
Those have slower time on their lower levels
and you can get across the event horizon of
those juggernaut galactic core black holes
without being shredded by tidal forces.
I could imagine folks migrating down to the
lower levels of those Birch Planets to go
hide near them while the upper levels were
dumped into the core to widen it to swallow
the lower levels, right before the Big Rip
hit.
One other option comes to mind though for
us to close on.
A thing we focus on in other End of Time episodes
is that it’s the thought that counts, not
the official clock.
Those black hole civilizations assume hyper-efficient
but slow calculation, resulting in post-biological
minds thinking a trillion times slower than
we do but living trillions of trillions of
trillions of trillions of times longer, and
thus enjoying trillions of trillions of trillions
of times more subjective life experience.
Someone with an accelerated consciousness
moving a million times faster than our own,
as we often also contemplate for post-biological
life, can enjoy a normal human lifetime of
thought in under an hour.
So Big Rip Civilization might aim to burn
hot and fast, bypassing efficiency of computation
in order to maximize the use of resources
on a clock.
However, this reminded me of two things.
First, we have suggested in the past that
a civilization around a giant and short lived
star might employ this same reasoning to build
a Matrioshka Brain of stunning power if unimpressive
efficiency around supergiants.
We also suggested they might find some way
to enjoy an extended final moment of very
fast thought using that rapid but powerful
supernova shockwave as a power source for
running computation or thought on before it
burned out.
And back when the Big Crunch was still considered
a plausible scenario compared to Heat Death,
a cosmologist Frank Tipler suggested was what
he called the Omega Point, that a Universe
which slows its expansion – rather than
accelerating – and eventually begins to
contract, begins offering a pathway to vast
and arguably infinite computation as the collapse
occurs.
The concept has its flaws, and gets a lot
of criticism, and we may examine it more in
its own episode or one on the Big Crunch,
but the basic notion is that as a Universe
collapses it's essentially doing the opposite
of the ever expanding and entropy increasing
Universe so you get more heat to run more
power with ever shorter distance between your
various nodes of cal;culation and computation,
for even faster thinking or simulation.
Now this interests us today in combination
with our discussion of living around giant
stars, because if your civilization can’t
find ways escape into some other Universe
or shield yourselves from the effect, it probably
can find a way to use ultra-high Dark Energy
rates for power production and possibly also
use that expansion for rapid cooling.
So you might opt to take the notion of burning
the candle at both ends even further, and
perhaps find a way to ramp up your power production
and thus computation at an ever faster pace
as the Big Rip initiates, so as to enjoy a
ton of thought, or even an infinite amount
of it, before you and the Universe End.
A few instants of real time stretched to eons
of subjective time…
One brief moment of eternity.
We have a couple of announcements, but first,
my wife Sarah and I recently started piloting
lessons and I’m considering filming some
of those as a side project - I’d be curious
for your feedback on that - but I tend to
like to study up on things in advance and
recently I’ve been watching the “Learn
to Fly an Airplane” Series by Howard Forder
over on Skillshare, and it is one of many
examples of the top notch classes they have
for helping you explore new hobbies or professional
skills.
I’ve found it great for improving everything
from my hobbies like gardening and cooking
to professional skills I use for the show
like writing, animating, photography, video
production, and a ton more.
If you have a skill you’re trying to learn,
Skillshare is the perfect place to start,
and it can help you make 2022 a year of new
learning, growth, and connection through creativity.
Skillshare is ad-free, so you can stay in
the zone while you’re exploring new skills,
and they always have new content, new premium
classes launched each week, so there’s always
something new to discover, and they subtitle
everything in Spanish, French, Portuguese,
and German if English isn’t your first language.
Skillshare is an online community of millions
with thousands of inspiring classes, and you
can try it out for free!
The first 1000 people to use the link in this
episode’s description will get a 1 month
free trial of skillshare.
Act now, and start learning, today!
So as mentioned, we have a couple quick announcements
before we get to our schedule, first and foremost,
I mentioned some possible episodes this script
made me think on doing, like examining Tipler’s
Omega Point or Cylinder ideas, or the Big
Crunch, and so we will be having a poll over
on our community tab, please head on over
after this episode and vote to help us pick
which one we will be doing.
Second, the other end of that is that we often
get the episode topic poll ideas off of Patreon
or our facebook Forum, and recently did one
of those on Patreon that resulted in the upcoming
episode “Moon: Mega City” in March, and
drafting that episode reminded me that we
still have a lot of places in this solar system
we haven’t explored on this show and I thought
we’d return to our Outward Bound Series
this Spring and we will run another poll of
topics for those after our Livestream Q&A
next weekend, but we will be taking the poll
ideas from that Livestream Q&A, and whichever
ones seem most popular or interesting will
be our five on that poll, so make sure to
join Sarah and I for that.
That Livestream Q&A is going to be on Sunday,
January 30th at 4 pm Eastern time, but before
that we will have our last episode for January
coming out, and we will end the month like
we started it, by discussing cool things you
can do with Nuclear Bombs, as we look at terraforming
Mars and other worlds by nuking them green
and blue.
After that we will jump into February for
a look at the Future of Solar Power.
Then we will take a couple episodes to contemplate
Kessler Syndrome, the risk of a cascade of
orbital debris around Earth, and the implications
it might have on the Fermi Paradox as well
as other scenarios, natural or artificial,
which might imprison a civilization on their
homeworld.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
