This episode is brought to you by Audible.
We often think of the Arctic as being cold
and inhospitable.
But in the future, folks may have warm memories
of growing up there.
Today we will be looking at colonizing our
polar and tundra regions, borrowing from some
of the techniques we’ve discussed for colonizing
icy planets and moons.
In many ways, the arctic is the final frontier
for humanity, nobody reached either the North
or South Pole until the 20th century and permanent
outposts at either took a good deal longer.
However, living in the frozen wastes themselves
is hardly new, our ancestors often went far
north hunting and of course something has
to live there to be hunted.
It’s hard to live up there, but many species
have adapted to do so.
Today we want to look at both how we could
adapt to live there and how we could adapt
the Arctic to be more livable, and a bit of
an in between.
When we talk about other planets we often
distinguish colonizing methods between terraforming
– make a planet more Earth-like – and
Bioforming – make species able to live on
a planet as is, but in all probability you’d
often do a mix of both and that’s likely
to be true of the Arctic too.
There’s a few ways you can approach this:
you can enhance the arctic while keeping it
essentially the same ecologically, or you
can alter its climates and ecology to match
more temperate regions.
It depends on your goal.
Last time we talked about the deserts, whose
oases harbor lots of life, and it’s reasonable
to assume we can make similar setups in the
tundra.
For instance, we might enclose a sizeable
chunk of land with a dome and heat and light
it to provide food, akin to an oasis in a
dessert or a clearing in a forest.
Alternatively, you can blast whole areas with
orbital mirrors so it gets the same kind of
lighting as the temperate regions.
Which approach you take depends, again, on
your goals and of course your available technology.
The Arctic is also a big and nonhomogeneous
area with many different climates and environments
already.
And we don’t have just one; there’s the
Arctic and the Antarctic, meaning “near
the bear” and “anti-bear land.”
While actually referring to the constellations,
not the presence of polar bears, it gives
you a good idea that they have very different
environments.
The Arctic has many ice-buried islands, but
the Antarctic is an entire continent, and
you’d want to take different approaches
to each of them.
You’ve got different motives for colonization
too.
The Antarctic is essentially a buried treasure,
with vast mineral resources, while the Arctic
is more valuable for its oceanic and subterranean
resources.
These areas are also potential farmland, at
least in marginal regions.
They are cold and the ground is frozen in
permafrost, and they don’t get much light,
but there is enough light if you can keep
them warm.
In many cases you need no active heating,
just unfreezing the large reserves of greenhouse
gasses in the permafrost could heat up a domed-over
farm on its own.
That only works on the edges though, as further
in we need to actively heat and illuminate
the enclosure.
Some ecosystems don’t benefit from being
warmed either.
A lot of oceanic ecosystems rely on Krill,
and would breakdown if you warmed the arctic
waters too much.
That seems counter-intuitive, as warmer is
generally better for life.
Warming waters would cause filter feeders
such as krill to become more active, resulting
in increased feeding on phytoplankton.
However, since the amount of light hitting
the ocean would remain the same, phytoplankton
populations wouldn’t be able to grow at
comparable rates.
This would result in a net depression of the
total number of krill that could be supported,
which would impact the rest of the food chain.
Causing a drop in the total biomass in the
ocean.
Additionally, in colder places, meltwater
helps lift nutrients to those phytoplankton,
who need both sunlight and nutrients, which
are otherwise rarely mixed together in deeper
seas.
You could likely replace or tinker with a
cold-dependent ecosystem to get one that was
heavier in biomass, but it’s an another
example of unintended consequences of messing
with complex dynamic systems: warming up the
cold regions of the ocean can result in them
becoming barren.
We have another issue with warming these regions
up, and that’s the ice sitting there.
There is a lot of ice up there, and while
ice floating on water can be melted without
changing its volume all that much, ice on
land is much more complex.
Melt all that ice on land to get more land,
and you flood a lot of other existing and
valuable real estate, not to mention the ecological
issues that would occur.
I do want to take a moment to clarify, that
something I’ve noticed with a lot of debates
on Climate Change, is that there’s often
confusion about melting ice raising water
levels.
If I stick an ice cube in a glass of water,
the water level does rise, and you’d expect
it to rise more as the ice cube melted, but
it doesn’t.
Ice has a lower density than water, and that’s
what causes a small part of it to surface
when floating.
A quick caveat though: ice is freshwater,
the seas are salt-water and thus slightly
more dense, so when ice melts in them you
do get a slight net volume increase.
It’s not very large, but it’s not zero
either.
The actual concern of course is about ice
on land, rather than sea ice, as when it melts
it won’t have a net-zero effect, and there’s
also a lot more of it.
Floating Arctic ice is usually not very thick
at a few meters deep, while the ice depth
on Antarctica is a few kilometers.
That’s a lot more ice, and thus a lot more
water.
Of course that requires a caveat as well,
because continents float too.
We all float on a vast sea of magma, and if
you pile a lot of mass on the mantle, it pushes
down on it.
Remove it, and it will rise, though this rise
is more like a cushion or mattress slowly
returning to normal after someone stands up
from sitting on it.
Indeed, the arctic region is rising about
a centimeter per year as they rebound from
the Ice Age.
Related to that matter, you also have to consider
thermal expansion.
Water might expand when it freezes, but most
materials expand when warmed.
You also can’t you assume the geology would
remain static, since while most human activities
have no real effect on volcanoes and earthquakes,
shifting continents is probably an exception.
You might also get water dumped down into
the mantle, or even new volcanic hotspots.
Fortunately, that would be pretty minimal,
although there’s evidence glaciers mitigate
magma flow.
However, it is a thing to keep in mind for
later in the series when we will discuss intentionally
moving continents.
It’s also why we always say, when it comes
to terraforming other planets, by the time
you’re done the place looks nothing like
it used to.
You’re not just spray-painting some green
and blue on a planet.
Needless to say, any sort of precision modeling
of this is tricky at best, especially since
it depends a lot on mantle viscosity and composition
and we’re not too sure of that.
Melt all the ice on the planet and the overall
coastlines will change an awful lot, but the
specifics are way harder to calculate and
that is part of why you’ll often see differing
figures on rising sea levels.
Models change as we learn more, and we often
find out a given effect was overlooked or
exaggerated, or may be disputed in terms of
severity of effect.
We’re still relative novices at climate
and tectonic modeling.
Of course being novices one might argue that
it’s not terribly wise to mess around too
much with what we have, and of course as we’ve
mentioned throughout the series, we’re exploring
the options available, not the ethics or wisdom
of them.
However we do have some options for colonizing
the arctic that wouldn’t melt everything,
and similarly you’d presumably start small
with things like this, even if you were planning
to go all-in down the road, so let’s begin
by looking at them.
At the center of every ecology is the quantity
of available energy, but we mostly mean food
energy, not raw sunlight, even if the two
are fairly intertwined.
The home range size for the typical polar
bear is gigantic, literally tens of thousands
of square kilometers, while a similarly sized
carnivore in a temperate region needs mere
hundreds, and a herbivore just a handful.
We, alternatively, can support several individuals
on just a kilometer of farmland using even
rudimentary agricultural techniques, let alone
what we can pump out from a climate controlled
greenhouse using our best modern technology.
Coming up with an economically viable source
of energy to do this is another matter we’ll
address shortly, but if you have it, you can
create small warm oases which will not seriously
impact local temperature or melt all our ice.
Indeed, since it’s critical to keep them
well insulated to save power, and also to
keep the whole place from sinking, the effect
on the whole ecosystem would be minimal.
Sinking is an issue when building arctic outposts.
Incidentally, you can sink into the ice slowly
even if your connection to it is below freezing,
but you’d rapidly melt through if your exterior
temperature was above freezing, and if you’re
doing this on pack ice, you’ll drop right
into the ocean.
A quick note on ice: you’ve got 3 main types
of sea ice.
Drift ice, often called brash ice, which is
small bits floating around; pack ice, which
is the same only jammed together; and fast
ice, which is fastened to the ground rather
than floating.
You’ve also got glacial ice, which accounts
for most of our freshwater on Earth, and this
would be on land or attached to it as a massive
ice sheet.
You’ve also got permafrost, areas where
the ground is always frozen except for a seasonal
thin layer at the top, and these are regions
of interest for early colonization.
For those warm oases, if you’ve got the
energy and it’s for people, you’re fine
as-is.
If it’s intended to bolster local wildlife
by increasing the food supply, things are
a bit more complex.
They need to be able to get in and out of
those enclosures, and they also have to be
focused on growing food the indigenous species
can eat and which won’t represent an invasive
species.
Entry is kind of tricky since sticking holes
in something you are trying to insulate tends
to be counterproductive, and tunnels will
rapidly become hunting bottlenecks.
We can use a lot of tricks we’ve developed
over the years for houses or grocery store
freezers or doorways, like air curtains, to
help keep the heat in, but you’d still have
that bottleneck issue and end up with a polar
bear camping in your entry tunnels.
There’s ways around this, and you could
also make the whole thing basically a ship
so that melting through the ice wasn’t a
problem, but you still might prefer some approach
like having drones distribute that food over
a wider range.
If you’ve just got a few such places, they’d
be nice for tourism since they’d attract
the wildlife, and endless empty ice is much
more boring to look at, but if you’re making
a lot of these places you might prefer they
be almost entirely automated since not many
folks would want to live there anyway.
You might also go that anthropic-ecology route
we mentioned a month back in the episode “Environments
of Space Habitats”, where you tweak the
local flora and fauna to mesh better with
an ecosystem that’s essentially manmade
and human-specific, akin to urban ecosystems
but a bit more deliberate.
There we used the example of crows or squirrels
retrieving litter and turning it in at depots
in exchange for food, thus allowing a higher
net density of wildlife by supplementing their
food supply while also getting some work done
for us.
These don’t have to be sitting on land either;
again you could make one a ship, or attach
it under a chunk of floating ice.
As an example, a big floating lens in the
water would concentrate some light in the
volume below it, creating a little boost in
the local temperature and light availability.
This is similar to the domes we discussed
in colonizing Ceres, where you’re just focusing
the available light to concentrate it, rather
than adding energy.
This is a decent approach if you just want
small areas or pathways to be warmed too.
An often mentioned silver lining of the ice
caps receding, is that you could sail freighters
or fishing boats along the Northern Coast
of Eurasia.
However, by just warming a narrow canal through
the ice, you’d achieve much of the benefit
without the major climatic impacts.
This concentrated light method only works
for part of the year.
Both the days and the light intensity get
very short as you go further north, and if
you get far enough, end entirely during a
the dark season.
You can’t concentrate nothing.
However, while the permafrost may stay frozen
year round in such places, if you go deep
enough things warm up, and you can use geothermal
energy as your power source by drilling down,
providing plenty of warmth and an electricity
supply.
There’s not enough to thaw the whole place,
but you could have large pylons bringing heat
up to oases or string them in a line along
the coast to keep fast ice from forming on
those and keep your sea lane clear.
Nor are the depths of the Earth the only place
that’s got a surplus of heat – though
subterranean colonies up north is an option
we’ll explore later in the series.
Last time we mentioned you could bring freshwater
down to deserts by towing icebergs, but this
need not be a one-way trip.
You could build huge pipelines to act like
radiators, bringing freshwater to hot deserts
and warm saltwater back up to the arctic.
We talked about doing something similar around
the polar regions of Mercury to deal with
its incredibly long day-night cycle and wide
peak hot and cold temperatures.
We’ve also talked about how to deal with
the long day and night cycles on the moon,
or on the genuinely dark sides of tidally
locked planets.
The simplest answer would tend to be orbital
mirrors.
This is something we’ve discussed before
and was even in the headlines recently as
a suggested way of replacing streetlights.
You hang a mirror overhead and bounce light
down on a city.
That’s a pretty bad idea itself, since street
lighting is about safety, not agriculture
or temperature, so it being blocked out whenever
its cloudy is a serious issue.
However, you can light up a small area with
one quite well, and we have two handy lesser
known orbital paths that works well for this
purpose: the Tundra Orbit and the Molniya
or Lightning Orbit.
They’re perfect for adding sunlight to high
latitudes, and can also be configured to block
sunlight at lower latitudes if you want to
balance out how much light you’re adding
to the planet.
Both orbits are eccentric elliptical ones
that are angled up well above or below the
equator, but the tundra orbit is a bit less
eccentric and is geosynchronous, though not
geostationary.
It stays over the same general longitude of
the Earth as it rotates, but moves north and
south to describe a very lop-sided figure
eight.
This lets it do something called ‘apogee
dwell’, where it spends a much larger portion
of its orbital period over an area.
As you may recall, elliptical orbits do not
have the orbiting object always moving at
the same speed: when they are furthest away
they move slowest.
We call that furthest place the Apogee for
Earth, and Aphelion for the Sun.
As it falls back down on its orbital path,
getting closer, it speeds up until it reaches
its closest approach to the object it orbits:
the Perigee for Earth or Perihelion for the
Sun.
Then it begins to slow as it climbs back up
and around to Apogee again.
This highly cocked orbit provides a better
angle at high latitudes, much the same as
the Sun in the summer or equatorial regions.
The Molniya orbit differs in that it orbits
every 12 hours, and has a long apogee dwell
over some high latitudes.
This is a very good way to shine light on
places with very short days or during their
no-light period.
Of course our space-based warming method doesn’t
have to be done entirely with light.
As we discussed with power satellites, beaming
down microwaves lets you circumvent a lot
of atmospheric interference, and it’s fairly
easy to convert that into heat energy.
If you are deriving most of your electricity
from power satellites, you don’t have to
worry so much about greenhouse gas emissions
either, and can even begin removing them.
Plus warming areas gives you something to
do with power from such satellites if you
have peak power usage times that requires
surplus capacity.
That of course is one of the nice things about
fission, fusion, and renewables too: with
zero-emissions energy, you can suck up carbon
dioxide and water and convert them into hydrocarbons,
making your plastics and gasoline carbon neutral.
If one has access to significant stockpiles
of fissionable materials, you do have another
interesting option that is also handy for
cold asteroids that we mostly skimmed over
in Colonizing Ceres.
Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators are
relatively easy to make, maintenance free,
and long lasting, but their efficiency is
low so most of the energy is lost as heat.
Needless to say, ‘lost as heat’ is a pretty
relative term in the frozen arctic.
You could slap a dome up in the tundra with
some nice sturdy LED lights spectrum-tailored
for photosynthesis and powered by an RTG in
the basement whose waste heat is warming the
ground.
Something like that is basically maintenance
free, there’s just nothing in it that would
be likely to break.
Strontium-90, a waste product of fission with
a half-life of 29 years, is almost ideal for
this use.
We can’t say this setup is completely independent,
but there’s no need to bring in a continuous
fuel supply.
Greenhouses offer a nearly power-free option,
though you obviously have capital investment
and maintenance, ditto if you opt to throttle
things up by including a passive geothermal
system stretching down beneath the permafrost.
As we’ve mentioned before, we do open air
farming now because we don’t actually need
that much farmland.
Our population has risen but how much food
we can get out of one chunk of land has risen
too.
If we want to keep increasing our numbers
without adding to our farmland, we’ll probably
have to convert over to dedicated greenhouse
facilities rather than open air farming.
This comes with huge advantages in crop yield
and water savings, plus helps to mitigate
a lot of farming issues since it’s a more
controlled environment, but it isn’t cheap
to dome over and maintain that.
However it does instantly grant you a lot
of new farmland since you can use them on
land too arid or cold for normal crops.
They trap moisture and heat, converting marginal
areas to fertile ones, though you also have
to build up your fertility since those spots
don’t really have decent soil initially.
Since the construction cost is the same on
good existing land, arid land, or tundra land,
this would probably be where you’d start
seeing a vast amount of greenhouse agriculture
begin: desert and tundra.
The land is cheap, and since not much lives
there you aren’t doing as much damage, especially
since you can take some of your yield to supplement
the diets of the local critters whose territory
you purloined a chunk of.
This still is disrupting that local ecology
a lot, but it’s better than just clear-cutting
a forest or jungle.
It does come with one other issue though.
Trapped in all that permafrost is a ton of
methane, and methane is a worse greenhouse
gas than carbon dioxide, about 25 times worse
in terms of heat trapping potential, so amusingly
you are better off torching the stuff rather
than letting it get free into the air.
However, this brings up an interesting silver
lining.
If we dome over a chunk of permafrost, thawing
out some methane to drift into that dome,
we can use its heat trapping ability to warm
that dome even more, capture it to burn it
for heat and electricity, and then use that
dome, now warm and high in CO2 levels which
many plants love, to sequester that carbon
into new and healthy soil.
It’s debatable if releasing that methane
even in this controlled way is beneficial,
but since it seems likely to be released anyway,
you might as well profit while minimizing
the damage, and convert those areas into more
livable places.
We can also offset its release through our
aforementioned arctic carbon capturing.
This is also assuming you want to live on
the surface or do agriculture in Alaska or
build beach resorts on the north shores of
Siberia.
However, we mentioned that these places have
a lot of unexploited mineral wealth, and we
have hundreds of underground lakes in Antarctica
and some with life in them.
Lake Vostok, the largest of them, has a huge
volume, beating out every one of the Great
Lakes except Lake Superior, and hosts a lot
of strange and unique life.
It’s also very easy to tunnel through ice,
and very easy to insulate inside it to maintain
a decent temperature.
There’s also no sunlight for a lot of the
year in Antarctica, and the sun never sets
for much of it too, so an underground city
in an ice cavern, presumably for mining, might
be appealing as you don’t really have a
decent natural day-night cycle there anyway.
It’s not as cold either, since you stay
right around freezing when buried deep in
the ice, avoiding the atrocious sub-zero temperatures
you get on the surface.
Needless to say cold can be advantageous too,
as we’ve noted before for manufacturing
and computing.
The handy thing about tunnels and cavern cities
is it doesn’t much matter what latitude
you put them at, and if they release a little
heat up to areas above, it’s beneficial
to the local ecosystem.
We’ll discuss those more next time though.
One last approach that ice caverns and underground
living suggest though, is to make the ice
deeper.
If water levels rising from ice melt is our
biggest concern, and keeping in mind that
in Antarctica at least most of the center’s
surface is essentially devoid of life, we
might decide to increase that big kilometers-thick
ice sheet by pumping more water there to freeze
in an ever growing mountain.
And this trick also works on mountains, which
have glaciers on them even in equatorial latitudes.
They’ll keep melting, and more so as you
add mass on top to push on them, but you can
keep pumping and stay ahead, growing the things,
and indeed you could build them in a framework
to stack them higher and stronger.
Think of the Wall in the North from Game of
Thrones, built of ice and gravel, or Pykrete,
ice mixed with fibers that makes it very strong
which we’ve discussed using as a construction
material in colonizing icy planetoids.
The taller you go, the more energy is needed
to pump the water there, but the easier it
is to get the water to freeze.
We discussed using very deep artificial cisterns
for storing excess water earlier in the series,
this is the other approach: storing it in
giant ice mountains, potentially with frameworks
and small ice cavern cities inside.
Maybe even ones that slowly melted their way
up to stay nearer the top.
As we can see there are a lot of options for
colonizing our colder climates.
Sadly, though, there’s not a lot of decent
science fiction on the topic.
It seems like authors tend to use the polar
regions as a backdrop, a cold and hostile
place that intensifies the danger the protagonist
is in.
This often makes for some great fiction, indeed
two of our books of the month for this year
were set in Antarctica: H.P.
Lovecraft’s “At the Mountains of Madness”
and John W. Campbell’s “Who Goes There?”
a.k.a.
“The Thing”.
I wanted something a bit more upbeat for the
end of the year, and with us recently looking
at Flat Earths, and discussing Santa Claus
Machines next week, it seems a great time
to finally give the Book of the Month to Sir
Terry Pratchett, author of the amazing Discworld
Series, and his novel “the Hogfather”:
a fun winter wonderland tale of the Discworld’s
parallel for Santa Claus, the Hogfather, going
missing and the Grim Reaper having to take
his place.
Discworld is a fantasy parody series covering
around 40 books, so you’ll have no shortage
of extra reading if you enjoy the book, and
the Hogfather is one of my personal favorites.
Sky1 also made a movie for it, and there’s
been a few other TV and film creations from
the series.
If you’d like to grab a free copy of “The
Hogfather”, just use my link in this episode’s
description, Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac
to 500500 to get a free book and 30 day free
trial.
I have literally never met anyone who didn’t
enjoy the Discworld series once they got into
it, but if you should happen to be a first,
you can exchange it for another book free
of charge.
So speaking of Santa, our last episode before
he sets off with his Reindeer will be on Santa
Claus and Cornucopia Machines: the catch all
terms for devices that can make just about
anything, like the Replicators from Star Trek.
Next week we’ll explore the possibilities
of, and societal impact of, such devices,
and look at some of our technologies developing
in that direction, like 3D printing, and some
of the challenges we face in improving them.
We will then close out the Fourth Year here
on SFIA on December 27th with a look at colonizing
the stars with technologies like that, and
the Seed and Data Ships concepts we’ve mentioned
as alternatives to Generation Ships, in “Seeding
the Stars”.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
