This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
The most exotic and varied ecosystems we may
encounter in the far future
may be those designed by our descendants.
So today we will be looking at the concept
of living spaceships, or bioships, something
we see a lot of in science fiction, though
in various different ways.
Sometimes it’s merely a self-repairing spaceship
with an AI, like we see with the ship Liberator
and its computer, Zen, in the classic dystopian
scifi show, Blake’s 7.
Other times it’s a sentient, living, but
totally engineered spaceship like the Vorlon
and Shadow vessels in Babylon 5.
Other times it’s far more organic, like
the Leviathans of Farscape, being more like
a space whale, that even breeds and reproduces,
as we see with Moya and her son Tayln.
From a science fiction perspective, this is
a really neat idea, and so too is the idea
that huge space monsters might evolve to live
in space, and we played with that notion in
the bonus episode, Void Ecology, that came
out Sunday.
But the idea that life might evolve in space
and be used by us might be rather backwards,
what’s interesting about living ships is
that they could form the basis for machines
turning into a more classic life form.
Today we’ll be looking at how that might
happen and how likely that might be how the
solar system and galaxy really gets colonized.
But we need to begin by asking three basic
questions.
First, what do we mean by a living ship, or
living machine?
Second, why would you want such a thing?
And third, what is the distinction between
biological and mechanical?
What is life?
Not an easy question nor one that we can rely
on classic definitions for, not here on SFIA
at least, where we spend so much time out
of modern contexts.
Just about any definition anyone normally
offers, we can kill almost off hand by challenging
at least one of the terms.
For instance the capacity to reproduce would
seem necessary, but you are obviously not
dead if you get a vasectomy or your tubes
tied, nor is a mule, one of humanity’s earliest
tinkerings with nature, not alive because
it is born sterile.
The mule is a great example of us creating
a lifeform as a machine too.
Needless to say mules or sterile humans also
have reproductive processes occurring all
the time, even excluding our own cells reproducing,
we are essentially colony organisms whose
minute-by-minute survival relies on independent
organisms inside us, inhabiting us the same
as we inhabit our own ecosystem and planet.
Indeed that includes a lot of viruses and
viroids which are themselves tricky fits inside
most biological definitions of life.
But we usually wouldn’t call a house or
skyscraper or a city or a planet alive just
because they had us within.
So too, definitions of life tend to hinge
on contrasting it against the inanimate, but
my car is obviously not alive and is way more
animate than your typical tree or fungus,
which are manifestly alive.
Similarly, artificial intelligence, in an
android body or strictly on a computer is
nothing new as a concept here, nor is the
idea that a human might have their mind uploaded
to a computer, same as an AI, but presumably
not an AI, and live in an entirely artificial
simulated reality if they wanted.
And since humans are the only known example
of sentient life, or at least sapient life,
we can hardly use high intelligence as that
definition, even if we broaden it to our furry
friends, few would say a microbe was intelligent
or that it wasn’t alive.
Nor can we zoom in on biological characteristics
like DNA, since an alien life form might not
use DNA, or even an amino acid based protein,
for encoding its genetic information.
This tilts one toward wanting to paraphrase
Justice Potter Stewart’s famous commentary
on Jacobellis versus Ohio on obscenity, “I
shall not today attempt further to define
the kinds of material I understand to be embraced
within that shorthand description, and perhaps
I could never succeed in intelligibly doing
so.
But I know it when I see it”.
Where life is concerned, “I know it when
I see it” might be very appropriate, particularly
considering it was a very clear thing to us
until we started learning more, finding exceptions,
and asking questions.
One that doesn’t get asked too much though,
is if we actually need a clear definition.
Car maintenance is an expensive thing, as
it is for the roads they travel down, the
houses and buildings they travel between,
and just about every other apparatus humans
use a lot.
It certainly would be nice if they required
no maintenance, either being ultra-sturdy
or self-repairing, and this is far more true
of interstellar spaceships which need to spend
centuries traveling the void between destinations,
or any artificial habitat we might build like
an O’Neill Cylinder or artificial world,
which are substitutions for Earth, which we
typically think of as requiring no intelligent
maintenance, since we tend to assume it has
none.
Or at least most of us these days think so,
but certainly many of our ancestors disagreed,
while simultaneously having definitions for
life that excluded the inanimate.
The boulder was not alive, the fungus on it
was, and while most of us would extend that
analogy to our planet, our ecosystem being
the fungus on the world-sized boulder, in
the end our ancestors might prove a lot more
correct in their attitude.
See, if we terraform another planet, it is
very likely to need methodical effort to keep
it terraformed, at the very least in carefully
tailoring the organisms there to maintain
that environment, and needless to say any
artificial habitat would need that maintenance
too.
This does not necessarily require going all-in
with self-repair, something with cells and
organs that repaired or replaced themselves.
You might have a car that’s simply computerized
enough to know its tire is getting bald or
its engine needs a piston replaced, self-diagnosing,
and simply sends a request for approval to
you and an inquiry to its manufacturer about
what to do, then drives itself off to a mechanic.
We are clearly already going that route, with
more and more computerization in devices that
self-diagnose and get constant update patches
from its creator.
With self-driving cars, one able to take itself
in for repairs would seem viable.
This doesn’t help us much with other machines
though, and while home delivery and pickup
is getting far smoother and easier and cheaper,
so that a machine might just send out a repair
call for pickup by a drone or such that comes
to your home, it obviously doesn’t work
for your home, which is rather hard to haul
away for repairs, plus you live inside it.
One way we picture this is that self-repair
might be done by a host of tiny robots going
around doing the work, but in such a case
they’d seem more like the life form that
repaired a non-living machine.
Of course if they are operating under the
control of a sentient AI, one might argue
that the house was more like the skeleton
of that House computer and the little robots,
be they the vacuum cleaner or the nanobots
fixing the wall, were its flesh and blood,
or symbiotic organisms under its management.
There’s a pretty obvious motivation for
self-repair and general automation like that,
and not merely convenience, the savings in
time and money would obviously be huge, and
while I always counsel folks to learn many
skills, I have to say I don’t think I ever
gained much from learning how to put drywall
up or nail shingles on my roof, and I don’t
think our civilization would lose much if
our roads were altered to be more like bone,
with some machine or tailored life form repairing
them.
Indeed, that’s another pathway we might
see our machines go – and yes roads and
highways are machines under most definitions
of ‘machine’, a term that is just as broad
and vague as ‘life’, and to which “I
know when I see it” probably not only applies,
but likely should also be something we should
be asking ourselves if we actually need a
strict definition for.
Picture a road with all sorts of conduits
through it carrying water, sewer, electricity,
etc.
Now imagine one that also had an equivalent
of blood, a nutrient for feeding the repair
mechanisms of that road and which could scab
over a spot that had a pothole ripped into
it.
Such an invention would be worth trillions
in long term savings and even safety.
Picture one a bit smarter that plows itself
of snow, keeps warm enough to not ice over,
that cleans and mows its own ditches and berm,
and that keeps the cracks in its adjoining
sidewalk free of weeds.
Imagine one that knew when people or animals
were crossing when cars were approaching and
could shout at everyone to avoid collisions.
It’s easy to see how a living ship, able
to repair itself and maybe also smart enough
to navigate or protect itself, might be very
popular for interstellar or even interplanetary
economy, or to see how self-repairing appliances
or a House AI that could see to such repairs
would be useful.
But we can start seeing how this could apply
to all sorts of things where whole communities
used them, not just a single person or family
or a ship’s small crew.
We’ll come back to this concept in a bit,
but let’s get to spaceships, beginning with
that crew.
We often see small crews on scifi TV shows
because we really only want or need a small
cast, and it's amusing that even when we have
big crews on such ships, they tend to be almost
as much in the background as the huge crews
involved in making those shows, who rarely
get noticed unless one is accidentally in
a shot or left their coffee cup in a shot.
Bioships in fiction are a nice way around
this, allowing monstrously huge ships that
only need a very small crew, and often don’t
need any at all, beyond a desire to serve
or a general lack of purpose without them.
This is maybe not too far off the mark either,
because while such crew exist in the show
to give us humans to see and center the stories
around, it’s rather likely any minds we
were using for such ships would be based on
something with social tendencies and a fondness
for people, to make it easier to fit into
our purposes, so they might need people onboard
to feel comfortable and happy with their task.
In fan wars about scifi spaceships, it will
often get noticed that many of those leviathans
with crews cited in the hundreds or even thousands
are woefully understaffed, or at least under
populated.
The USS Enterprise-D for instance, shown to
be of no higher density than a typical naval
vessel, which is to say, less than water,
one ton per cubic meter so they don’t sink,
has 1014 crew and is listed as having a displacement
of 4.5 megatons, 45 times what a Nimitz-class
aircraft carrier displaces, which also has
6 times the crew packed into it, essentially
270 times the population density.
For the moment we’ll just say the density
of the Enterprise-D was the same as water,
and thus has 4.5 million cubic meters of space,
and a crew of 1014.
This would equal 4400 cubic meters per person,
a fairly spacious house or apartment is usually
only going to have about 100 per person, for
folks not used to metric, a 10 foot by 10
foot room is going to be about 20 cubic meters,
and a spacious 2500 square foot home of five
people would be 500 cubic meters, or 100 a
piece.
When we start talking about the huge Star
Destroyers of Star Wars or cruisers of Warhammer
40k, both of which use tens of thousands of
people for their crews, but which often are
kilometers long, when you run the numbers
you’d be talking about entire warehouse
sized areas per person.
Nor are they simply full of equipment and
ship components, considering when they do
lists mass and size for most of these things,
not only is it low-density enough to float
on water, many would literally be able to
float in air.
Of course most of these things are big simply
to be big and intimidating in a story, but
it should be noted that these things probably
need that crew not for actual piloting or
targeting, which would presumably be done
by a computer anyway, but just for keeping
the place clean.
Assuming you even bothered, left to itself
for centuries of operation these things would
probably accumulate enough dirt and debris
to have significant ecosystems pop up in them,
not just mold and rats.
And many would be operating at least that
long, if not far longer, the crew, might not
even remember how to operate or fix a lot
of it, a problem we looked at in the Million
Year Ark, and which a living ship helps with
quite a bit.
We also do have a motivation for building
things that big, and for not wanting a very
big crew either, whether it’s a colony ship
or a bulk freighter, these things need to
be big to get the job done.
If you want to colonize another solar system
using the transplanted ecology approach, rather
than trying to print or grow everything from
frozen or digital DNA storage, you have to
go huge, see our episode Exporting Earth in
the Generation Ships series for details.
If you’re using that approach, you’ve
got living ships one way or another.
Some bulk freighter that spends thousands
of years in service, slowly moving cargo here
and there, is essentially an artificial world
all on its own.
It’s very likely to have internal hydroponics
and gardens for the crew, even if that’s
just a handful of people, and could very easily
have rats and cats for catching them, as many
sea-going craft have had.
Though some kind of cargo sterilization protocols
may be necessary, as a type of frontline immune
system, but inevitably it won’t be completely
effective.
It’s also very likely most of such ships
would be lit and pressurized too, power for
life support is one thing any interstellar
vessel will have a huge surplus of, and it
makes a lot of sense to keep your air and
water reserves, of which you need a lot for
long duration voyages, actively in play rather
than sitting in some pressurized tank where
they will leak.
Even areas kept under partial pressure or
close to vacuum could easily end up inhabited
too, as we noted in Void Ecology, plenty of
life seems capable of existing in vacuum,
especially if shielded from radiation, and
if it’s got a smooth transition for evolution
via regions of partial pressure, or inevitable
slow leaks like around airlocks, you could
get a lot of life there.
It may not be a very lush ecological niche
to fill, but some extremophile will probably
do it, assuming we don’t just make something
that does.
Having an organism, or some machine that might
as well be an organism, that runs around your
ship or habitat hull fixing all the damage
from radiation and micrometeors, is just as
desirable as ones that can fix a house or
road.
More so because houses are fairly small affairs,
and roads are long but skinny, but some O’Neill
Cylinder housing hundreds of thousands probably
has several football fields worth of external
hull per person, if not more, and some lightly-crewed
bulk freighter would vastly exceed that.
You’re not going to want to do that by hand,
and if you’re using robots anyway, ones
that reproduce and do their work mostly without
oversight is ideal.
Robot or adapted life form, or biomachine,
you probably don’t want it any smarter or
more aggressive at its job than it needs to
be, and you probably want specialized ‘species’
for each main task, moving more toward our
living ship concept being an ecosystem rather
than an organism.
But the alternative path, of giving the whole
thing an overall consciousness, animal or
human level, is also attractive and might
be used as an alternative – one big body
with organs or species of microbe equivalents
inside it.
Not that either is exclusive of the other.
Such an organism need not be smarter, or even
as smart, as the stuff living inside it, any
more than a house need be as smart as it’s
owners or even the cats or dogs or rats living
in it.
But it would be very tempting to go this path.
After all, we know the desire for automation,
just because we can use the crew doesn’t
mean we want to, nor that the crew need be
human even if it has humans onboard.
A post-scarcity civilization may easily be
able to afford such things and to pay the
crew, but may not be able to find anyone willing
to be that crew, since it’s sort of the
nature of a post-scarcity civilization that
it is very hard to fill any jobs people don’t
enjoy.
Even a colony ship might have no crew, just
people who lived inside it, or were frozen
for the duration.
On some boring freighter run, a huge ship
carrying Gigatons of ice or metal between
worlds at slow speeds, trying to find a crew
might be a hassle.
Indeed even some ship that exists for no other
reason than to ferry people back and forth
from Earth to Mars is ideally so automated
it just runs itself.
After all we did make these organisms intelligent,
and this is us we’re talking about too.
We anthropomorphize everything, or at least
give them some sort of personality, so if
we can actually do that rather than pretending,
we probably will.
We are either going to embrace artificial
life or ban it, and even if we ban human or
superhuman artificial intelligence, I really
doubt we’d see a ban on animal level intellects;
which really is sufficient for most of our
purposes, assuming you do it right in terms
of setting up the instinctive knowledge and
senses, navigating the solar system or even
the galaxy is actually a lot easier than moving
around a planet.
You’re just configuring those sensory organs
and wetware with space in mind, so it’s
a radar dish rather than ears, and telescopes
for eyeballs, and since we’re talking about
things in the blurry zone of life and machine,
it could be setup to navigate off artificial
positioning systems like our GPS instead of
having to plot position off the planets or
pulsars, which could certainly be done too.
I should note incidentally that when I say
telescopes and radar dishes as eyes and ears
I’m just being metaphorical, but this is
space and a giant ship so it needn’t be
very metaphorical, you could grow an eyeball
the size of football stadium.
We’re not usually picturing anything very
organic in the classic sense though, you could
make an organism that could live in space
and slowly drift around eating and literally
digesting small asteroids and using the waste
from that as propellant, and develop some
biological photovoltaic devices too, which
were organic but used light for electricity
rather than chemical fuel production like
photosynthesis does, and it could have layers
of dead skin or scale for exterior shielding,
same as we have just a lot thicker.
I don’t think that would likely ever evolve
on its own, though maybe it could, as we discussed
in Void Ecology, but it certainly could be
engineered.
Regardless I’d expect it to be a lot more
engineered, but likely fitting this notion
of the end product essentially being an animal.
This is merely the start of such lifeforms
though, not the potential final product.
Such engineered life need not reproduce or
mutate, anymore than a mule does.
However, humans are paranoid, creative, and
lazy, so it would make a lot of sense to be
taking this approach to biomachines.
You build the original to a task and arranged
so that it’s got some intelligence but nothing
that would worry us.
I am not afraid of whales even though they
could swallow me whole, I am not afraid of
turtles and wouldn’t be even if I encountered
one so big it had a planet on its back, I
am not afraid of elephants, even if they were
so big they could barely stand on that giant
turtle’s back.
I am afraid of a superhuman AI, even if it’s
on a computer small enough to fit in my pocket.
But our major reason for wanting to get to
the solar system and the galaxy is to spread
life, and that’s a boring and exponential
growing process, literally perfect for organisms
tailored to reproduce.
You don’t actually need to be that smart
to turn an asteroid into an O’Neill Cylinder,
nor to be carrying people or other animal-level
machine mind that do some specific part of
that work, like cutting and installing airlocks
or growing the actual door, you just need
a blueprint you follow and some motivation
for doing it.
Similarly, as we discussed in the Gardener
Ships episode, interstellar colony vessels
might be prone to going to world after world
with just part of the crew departing at each
new stop, and indeed since those had to be
essentially mobile factories, might divide
themselves into additional new ships as they
go, since the galaxy is a big place that grows
in destinations geometrically with distance
from Earth.
So a ship able to grow in size and divide
or reproduce is very tempting.
A space habitat able to grow or reproduce
is very tempting.
A habitation dome on a new world able to grow
and reproduce is very tempting.
A bunch of asteroid squid that lay eggs on
asteroids which hatch and dig out metals and
go somewhere for harvesting is very tempting.
A big blowfish that sucks up gases from gas
giants and goes and spits them into a big
factory station that rewards it with metals
is very tempting.
So long as they’re smart enough to do their
job, but not so smart as to worry us as competition,
all is well, and that might be dumb as an
amoeba or smart as a whale, or even a bit
smarter.
No dumber than they need to be, no smarter
than would threaten us.
You can see how this might start turning into
its own ecology, with big whales or space
squid traveling between the asteroid or moon
mines to the big solar collector fish near
the sun or the big hollow spinning mollusk
habitat cylinders.
You can also imagine how this might all start
forming something much more organic, especially
if it’s meant to be a vanguard operating
well ahead of future human settlement.
You can also imagine how space whales meant
for tasks that are complete might be left
to do their own thing and meander around the
solar system in pods, bellowing out radar
whale song.
A future humanity is likely to be fairly ecologically-minded,
and fairly relaxed about what ‘ecology’
means, as that’s kind of a prerequisite
for terraforming or building artificial habitats,
and arguably surviving long enough to be able
to build such things, so I suspect we probably
would allow those life forms we created to
keep at what they were doing even if we considered
it not really necessary anymore or non-optimal.
Either tweaking them to perform a similar
but new task or training or modifying them,
or just working around them.
Here at home, one can easily imagine how that
might result in the construction of a dyson
swarm that was more organic, be it actual
lifeforms that reproduced as the habitats,
ships, and collectors we needed or merely
those machines with ancient and venerable
minds inside them, something like the Genus
Loci, or spirit of the place, tasked with
maintenance of the place or overseeing others
which did specific tasks.
Away from home though, it would be very easy
to imagine systems unsettled by us yet having
developed into full scale Kardashev-2 ecologies,
complete with giant space whales and space
kraken and space turtles, all happily meandering
about awaiting our eventual arrival and mutating
and adapting and diversifying.
Might be tricky when we arrive, since we’d
now be settling established ecosystems we’d
likely want to preserve, not dead rock, but
personally I find that idea entirely appealing,
and there’s something poetic about seeding
the galaxy this way, of getting to hear the
radio whale songs or being just a bit careful
arriving at some new rock for fear there might
be a big space crab waiting inside.
It’s hard to say what we might find out
there in space, as the Universe is a pretty
surprising and puzzling place, but that is
half the fun.
Solving puzzles helps keep the brain sharp
and is an excellent way to learn, and that’s
something our friends over at Brilliant like
to emphasize in all their courses.
They’ve got a great new one on science puzzles
where you’ll learn as you play with puzzles
on topics like houses of mirrors, bridge-building
challenges, and quantum light.
The key to learning is to keep it interesting
and to find time to do it, and they help with
that too by having an offline app that lets
you download the courses so you can work on
them anywhere, whenever you have a few free
minutes, even when traveling where your internet
connection might get spotty.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we have a special treat coming up this
weekend as we team up with Jade from Up and
Atom to take a look at Boltzmann Brains - hypothetically
randomly assembled minds - and the Anthropic
Principle.
But we’ll still have our regular episode
next Thursday as we return to the Alien Civilization
series to look at possible Alien Invasion
Scenarios and what might motivate any potential
Alien Overlords.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
