In the future, humanity may travel to many 
strange new worlds and make homes on them,  
but we may also build giant space 
habitats for humanity to call home. 
Probably one of our most popular topics on this 
channel is space habitats, but usually we’re  
either discussing one specific type out of many, 
like an O’Neill Cylinder, or we’re just mentioning  
them in passing as this sort of inevitable future 
for all mankind. Folks coming to the channel can  
be surprised sometimes how we talk about them 
less as things we might build a few of and more  
as a mass-manufactured archipelago that will 
eventually house the super-majority of humans,  
instead of planets being their main homes.
Space Habitats are very different from a  
basic space station like those we have now, 
and are cost prohibitive until we have a  
much larger presence in space, like mines and 
forges on the Moon, as well as greater energy  
abundance and better automation that is able to 
handle much of the production, so humans aren’t  
individually welding each plate of the habitat’s 
floor together by hand. It is very likely though  
that we will reach those benchmarks inside this 
century, in which case, much as high-rises and  
skyscrapers become economical with cheap steel, 
enormous cylinder and ring shaped habitats,  
spinning to produce artificial gravity, may become 
much cheaper than trying to buy any free space on  
Earth, where land values are likely to keep 
rising as we simultaneously grow in numbers  
and try to grow the number of protected natural 
environments or restore them. And much of this  
can seem incredibly counterintuitive, at first.
Today we’re going to take a little time to review  
the basics of what space habitats are, how 
they work, and why their human populations  
might outnumber the population living 
on planets, but I thought we’d explain  
the various types and their advantages by 
giving some example cases for each major one,  
and I thought we would begin by discussing 
the idea of using them for Nature Preserves.  
And here we are talking mostly about habitat 
purpose today rather than megastructure type, an  
exhaustive overview of which can be found in our 
2-hour long episode, the Megastructure Compendium. 
One of the more common notions people will 
suggest for fixing our world and helping  
to significantly reduce extinctions is to settle 
some new worlds and build some space habitats and  
evacuate humanity to those, leaving only a tender 
crew of people or even robots to help restore this  
planet to its previously pristine condition.
Now, this is where space habitats come in,  
and that would seem like an incredibly expensive 
alternative to just buying some land for a nature  
preserve, but as time goes on and humanity 
gets better with automation and space travel,  
there’s not likely to be any place with 
higher real estate values than on Earth,  
so it would probably be ultimately cheaper 
to build new space habitats for endangered  
critters than to buy land here on Earth for them.
We’ll bypass entirely the notion that we might  
force people off Earth. I have often heard 
folks suggest that, and I think they’re just  
not thinking about that notion and all that it 
entails. Forced migration should never be high  
on your list of problem-solving tools, and telling 
someone they need to abandon their tribal lands,  
or the farm that their family has tended for 
generations, or the tombs of their ancestors, or  
their holy lands, isn’t going to go over well with 
lots of people. Alternatively, what is neat about  
space habitats is that you can build them very 
customizable in conditions and sizes, and you can  
also move them, so we might contemplate relatively 
small ones for specific endangered species’ that  
don’t need a huge food chain under them, or even 
a huge one for creatures that need enormous land  
space, like elephants. In either case you can 
ensure that dangerous predators or parasites for  
that protected species aren’t in the habitat.
A cylinder habitat floating in the vacuum of  
space, whose outer hull is surrounded by 
vacuum and constantly bathed in radiation,  
is very protected from invasive species. Indeed, 
you could even unleash tailored viruses or smart  
hunter-killer drones to handle a species 
you needed to remove from an environment,  
that snuck in, which would seem like 
overkill or bad management, honestly,  
but it’s an option that’s available. Whereas 
doing that in a single shared environment like  
Earth is killing off an entire species and risking 
mutation. So too, such habitats avoid the risk of  
having all your eggs in one basket, you can build 
multiple of the same type of biome preserve for  
redundancy, and they can be built as needed.
What’s more, they can be funded not just by  
donations and taxes but by selling the land on 
Earth. Right now, that wouldn’t work economically,  
an acre of space station is going to cost you 
many billions of dollars, compared to a maybe a  
thousand for some existing woodlands, but a few 
thousand years from now it is entirely possible  
that an acre or hectare of land on Earth will 
run the modern equivalent of billions of dollars,  
whereas space habitats might be as cheap as dirt, 
with that literally being the most expensive part. 
There’s also the issue that Earth doesn’t have 
enough space, especially if you want redundancy.  
Before humanity started making changes to our 
planet, everything was in competition with  
each other and things were getting wiped out, 
not with the same rapidity as the human era,  
but it was still the norm for things 
to diverge and then get wiped out,  
and we mustn’t romanticize Darwinism like 
some X-Men comic book villain like Apocalypse,  
nature isn’t really picking and choosing 
for ever better life. There’s just a gross  
statistical effect of life forms generally being 
better at surviving over long enough periods,  
and things can die off just from climatic cycles 
making places colder or drier or vice-versa.  
It can also be fairly arbitrary, for instance, 
right now your most important survival trait as  
an organism on Earth is to be viewed as cute 
and cuddly to humans, or to be good at living  
in a concrete jungle or suburban environment. 
Space habitats avoid these unexpected changes  
because we can keep a space habitat’s climate 
exactly as we want, or change it when we want. 
So if we want room to make sure various plant and 
animal species get protected, where they can still  
diverge, and where we can still have some room for 
resurrecting extinct species from their preserved  
DNA, or experiment with interesting variations 
without risking them wrecking a local ecosystem  
if we include them in it, then we want to have 
more places to do that than Earth’s surface alone. 
There is a lot of room to grow, as not only 
can some of these preserves be around any of  
the billions of stars in this galaxy, but our Sun 
alone produces 2 billion times the sunlight than  
what actually hits Earth, meaning we can build 
2 billion times Earth’s surface area before we  
run out of locally available sunlight. That means 
that even if only 1 in a thousand of the available  
habitats or sunlight around our sun was used for 
Nature Preserves and Zoos, it would represent 2  
million times the space Earth has. And even then, 
we might augment things with fusion reactors or  
black hole generators to power even more of them 
around our Sun, though again we’ve billions of  
other stars that appear to be empty of intelligent 
life at the moment. Indeed they might harbor life  
too, maybe just simple life, and while it might be 
best to leave those planets be if they’re not very  
common, we would still probably be smart to build 
some space habitats for those alien planets too,  
as backups. And again space habitats are mobile so 
you can shift to other solar systems if you want. 
Now, when it comes to space habitats, size 
is often viewed as bigger being better,  
but in practice you never really want to have 
to build more than you need. Where rotating  
cylinder habitats are concerned, they can be very 
long on their axis, but the wider you try to make  
them the more strain it puts on the floor. It 
is essentially the same as a suspension bridge  
whose length is the same as the habitat’s 
circumference, and like a suspension bridge,  
the more asphalt and cars, or dirt and water, you 
pile on top of it, the stronger it needs to be. 
We usually estimate that modern steel could handle 
a habitat several miles or kilometers across,  
and materials like titanium or Kevlar 
could do even better. This is the reason  
the classic Island Three O’Neill Cylinder 
is 5 miles or 8 kilometers in diameter,  
and 20 miles or 32 kilometers long, 
as in the 1970s when it was designed,  
that was considered as big as available 
materials could safely go, though again you  
can make them much longer, even to the point of 
being more like a rope than a cylinder or ring. 
It would be well within modern materials to 
double that diameter or more, and super strong  
materials like graphene could potentially allow 
a diameter of 1000 miles, should we perfect the  
art of mass manufacturing it. Graphene is made of 
carbon, as is diamond, which we can also make now  
and is ultra-strong, and carbon is one of the 
most abundant materials in the solar system,  
and Universe. So, we have a lot of raw material we 
can build space habitats out of compared to what  
we can do with iron or steel or aluminum, 
let alone rarer materials like titanium. 
Hence space habitats like New Geauga 6BC, which 
seeks to emulate the natural environment of Geauga  
County, Ohio, in the year 6000 BC, shortly after 
the last ice age. Geauga is Raccoon in the Seneca  
language if you’re curious, one of my favorite 
critters, and the county is the one next to my  
own and has 400 square miles or 1000 kilometers 
of land, and would require just a little more  
land than the Island Three design, by either 
building about a mile wider or a few longer. 
New Geauga 6BC does allow visitors, unlike some 
habitats, but doesn’t allow hunting as many do,  
and while it is quite large, it is still 
necessary for scientists to occasionally  
inseminate some of the larger animals with outside 
DNA to help avoid the risk of bottlenecking. 
That’s not true of the Great Congo McKendree 
Cylinder in orbit out past the Moon, which was  
built principally with African Forest Elephants 
in Mind and is thrice as big as the Congo back on  
Earth. So it’s assumed it’s big enough to 
support a genetically diverse population,  
especially as elephants are pretty big and 
hard to miss, so the scientists who monitor  
the habitat can occasionally splice in some 
fixed DNA if any bottlenecking occurs anyway,  
which it might, considering how endangered 
they were in the 20th and 21st century. 
Siberia Park, a nearby neighbor of the Great 
Congo and similar in size, employs some of the  
best geneticists as it’s the home of many extinct 
Ice Age creatures like Mammoth and Sabre-Tooth  
Tigers which they’ve restored. Siberia Park also 
augments the food supply of its rather barren  
tundra by having many ancillary space farms nearby 
that deliver fodder for the environment to allow a  
higher density of life so that visitors can enjoy 
seeing mammoths while skiing down the many slopes. 
Space Farms are very common in an era where most 
folks live in space. As many people like living  
at suburban density, and habitats intended for 
human occupation need more features than a simple  
one for growing food, these are often smaller and 
vastly cheaper farm stations where everything is  
kept to a minimum in terms of structure, and the 
conditions are tailored to the crop or crops in  
question, in terms of lighting intensity, 
duration, humidity, temperature, gravity,  
and year length. Many are entirely automated and 
connected to large habitats by physical tethers  
that containers can ship back and forth along.
This is not just for feeding people and their  
pets either. People like wildlife in their habitat 
but you can pack a lot more cute critters into  
an environment if you’re supplementing the 
food chain. This can be fairly inventive too,  
like on Risu, a Japanese Space Habitat famous for 
its Walnut Trees and slightly-genetically-altered  
squirrels, who have been trained to pick up 
any bits of litter and carry them to garbage  
receptacles, and get a bunch of nut-like 
food pellets from it as a reward. Though  
this has resulted in them often stealing 
non-trash items from picnic-ers to trade in. 
For every nature preserve in the future, there’s 
dozens of habitats focused on human habitation,  
many with very lush parks which do use space 
farm augmentation to keep up a high furry critter  
population beyond what could be supported by the 
landscape, especially as many of the landscapes  
are ornamental gardens patrolled by drones 
that tend them and chase off curious critters,  
who might want to graze on the artwork.
Habitats are bound to have some themes that  
are fairly common but I doubt we would ever 
see tons of identical habitats being built,  
in terms of interior design, even if we might have 
standardized hulls. That standardization might  
be in construction and diameter, as you could 
probably do segments of a certain length, say 100  
meters or yards, and just bolt more on till you 
got the desired length, like a train adding cars,  
only without the actual break between them for 
one long, flowing, connected landscape. Though  
very long ones might go for actual segments 
to help with safety concerns of a blowout. 
Science fiction tends to exaggerate that 
too. Spacecraft and spaceships leak,  
it just comes with the territory, but someone 
shooting a hole in your hull with a pistol is  
not going to result in everyone being sucked 
out through that tiny hole, and because the  
difference is only one atmosphere of pressure 
between normal Earth air and the vacuum of space,  
you could plug a hole like that with your thumb 
and then slide a simple patch under it. Fear of  
depressurization shouldn’t be overlooked and will 
need to be a major issue which designers seek to  
address for people to feel safe bringing their 
kids to live on a space habitat, but it’s worth  
remembering that even a hole you could drive your 
car through leaking air into space on something  
like an O’Neill Cylinder is going to need to 
be bleeding air for hours before any noticeable  
drop in pressure station-wide would occur. That 
might be a hole leaking a million liters of air  
per second, but it’s tiny when you consider that 
that station has several quadrillion liters in  
total, and would need decades to bleed out.
Nonetheless many might opt for segmentation,  
possibly like sausage links, to allow a long 
stream of cylinder habitats to be connected  
together in a chain or accordion style, which has 
the advantage of letting you shuffle them and add  
or remove segments. Now, in theory there’s no need 
for segments to have the same diameter either but  
we do have an upper size limit based on material 
strength, which as mentioned, is several miles  
for steel and maybe a thousand for graphene, but 
both the economics and practical engineering will  
probably control those and set lower minimums. 
Overall though, the wider a spin-gravity habitat,  
the more Earth-like the conditions on it.
There is also such a thing as too small, and  
we believe if your station is rotating more than 
twice per minute it might cause nausea in some,  
like twirling around does, and might have greater 
impact on some organisms over others, and it is  
always important to remember that space habitats 
are never just humans, they’re not space houses,  
they’re space environments, complete with other 
flora and fauna and reasonably self-sufficient,  
just relying on neighbors for occasional exchanges 
of DNA, though many might trade heavily too. We  
are pretty confident 2 RPM or less will be fine 
for humans and other organisms, and that means a  
diameter of no less than 447 meters or 1467 feet.
For Earth-like gravity anyway, you could simulate  
Martian or Lunar Gravity at a much smaller 
diameter without needing to exceed 2 RPM, and for  
short term space exploration we are pretty sure 
most people could be comfortable with 6 RPM and  
maybe the occasional anti-nausea pill for some, 
which is why you see plans for space stations with  
rotating sections for near-future use that aren’t 
the size of football stadiums. Visiting or working  
at a space station for a little while, especially 
when we have a huge pool of recruits like we have  
for astronauts these days, is very different 
than trying to have babies on them or having  
people prone to getting seasick, or some vital 
pollinator species that couldn’t cope with much  
spin. And only time and experimentation 
will help us fine tune what we need. 
Now, this is centrifugal force, and in 
this context we call this spin-gravity,  
and while we may one day discover a means of 
generating gravity like they do in so many  
fictional spaceships in scifi, right now spin is 
the only trick we have besides piling lots of mass  
in one place – and we have space habitats that 
used that method too which we’ll come back to.  
For the moment, people often wonder why they 
don’t magically start floating if they jump  
up on a space station that’s spinning.
Inside that station, if you jump up,  
gravity is pulling you right back down again 
and in accordance with general relativity,  
acceleration and gravity have the same effect and 
cannot be distinguished from each other. When you  
jumped up in the air, the cylinder kept spinning 
under you, and you kept moving forward with it,  
same way as your body doesn’t magically stop going 
straight just because your car turned around a  
corner, it turns, it exerts force on you, and you 
turn. Here, you jump up but you’re still moving  
in the direction of that spin, and just ram back 
into the side of the cylinder a few feet later,  
which was spinning at the same speed and 
catches up with you, plus or minus a little  
variance based on rotational rate. This effect 
is true on any spinning object, including Earth. 
The big difference in gravity on such a habitat 
is that whatever the gravity is on the floor,  
it is zero up at the middle, and would be half at 
the halfway point to the middle. If your cylinder  
has a radius of 1000 meters, if you’re on 
a building 100 meters tall, putting you at  
90% of that full radius, the gravity would be 
90% of normal. On Earth, the gravity is lower  
100 meters up, but very little, and on a bigger 
cylinder habitat the effect would be less too. 
I think the problem here is that people are 
thinking that if they just appear in midair  
inside a cylinder habitat, they should just float 
there… and indeed that would be exactly what would  
happen if we had some magical portal we could send 
you through and there was no air either. We don’t  
have that, what we do have is some giant open air 
habitats with rimwalls, like Bishop Ring Forrest  
1997, a continent class woodland environment with 
a 2000 kilometer diameter located at the Earth  
L4 point with Sun, commissioned to replicate the 
environment of the Great Plains of North America,  
and of about the same size. While enjoying 
all the modern technology of its era,  
it superficially resembles late 19th century 
Mississippi River architecture, styles,  
and culture. Indeed, a lot of habitats have 
contracts which inhabitants would have to sign,  
about reasonable culture and style preservation, 
if they aim for a theme for the habitat,  
some of which might make the most nitpicky 
Homeowners or Condo Association look reasonable. 
That is one advantage of space habitats using 
spin gravity, they are very easy to leave and  
you can have your own personal spaceship that 
requires far less cost and engineering skill  
than the first spaceships humans made in the 20th 
century, indeed, not much more than those first  
automobiles, so it is easy enough to migrate. 
It is also very likely that space habitats  
will tend to clump together rather than being 
evenly distributed throughout the solar system,  
and would probably often dock to each other 
or connect via a tether for physical transport  
and sharing high-speed data or power cables, or 
even large water pipes if they really wanted to. 
But entire space habitats could migrate if 
they decided they didn’t like their neighbors  
or wanted to join another country. Also, you 
could potentially have spaceship houses that  
could ‘dock’ into space habitats, with empty 
lots covered with a dome that folks could lease,  
park their ship in, and have the dome fold back 
to include them. Though this is likely to require  
checks to make sure you’re not bringing invasive 
species with you, including unwelcome species of  
grass to the habitat’s lawn. Though trying to keep 
out things like fleas or gut microbes coming over  
on or in larger organisms would be trickier, 
which is why a very closed nature preserve  
might limit what goes inside to robots we could 
sterilize and control remotely, and frozen sperm  
or embryos to introduce genetic diversity.
On space habitats in general though,  
quarantine and inspection is likely to be less 
rigorous than that but still a common practice in  
a future of billions of space habitats, but the 
good news is that the nature of the setup means  
you can lock things down rather quickly and in a 
very ironclad way, if you need to. It is possible  
to imagine some habitats having guest policies 
that required them to use remote drones or virtual  
reality during visits or initial quarantine. 
On that note, it is very likely a human habitat  
would have its own digital ecosystem, internet 
and local virtual worlds, though many might be  
within a light second of thousands of other 
habitats to share without much signal lag. 
We have a lot of options for conglomerations of 
habitats too, not just the sausage link variety  
but something more like a honeycomb or soccer 
ball or chain-link fence or net, or the rungworld  
setup, many of these are discussed by name and 
type in the Megastructure Compendium episode.  
I would say you might get some neat shapes and 
geometries of bigger habitat conglomerations but  
suspect you would tend to have a lot of mutable 
and shifting and rarely complete conglomerations,  
rather than nice and organized shapes. A lot like 
any organization or development, static 100% usage  
is just an ideal, not something you ever really 
get. Though a habitat undergoing major repairs  
or refurbishment could be removed and towed away, 
as opposed to a vacant and decaying building in a  
community nowadays. You could have some enormous 
drydocks too, designed for holding O’Neill  
Cylinders for easy construction and repair.
It’s honestly not likely you’d have a single big  
station spinning around by itself either – indeed 
it is likely to be enclosed in some non-rotating  
protective superstructure anyway – either by 
itself or with some partners, and probably  
a whole sea of smaller specialized facilities 
like the local robotic space farms, where the  
floor is centimeters thick, not meters, to save 
on cost, and possibly giant defense systems and  
massive sails of solar collectors and mirrors.
A lot depends on how the lighting is coming in  
too, whether we’re artificially producing 
it by massive LED light bulbs or reflecting  
it in through mirrors, lenses, and fiber optics, 
or even just using large transparent sections,  
which I’m not a big fan of, even if you’ve got 
a strong material like diamond for the job,  
because I feel it wastes space, but that’s more 
of a personal opinion than an engineering flaw. 
Incidentally, I know we keep discussing cylinders 
and rings, but they’re not the only space habitat  
shapes. Indeed, they’re not even the only 
spin-gravity options. For spinning gravity,  
you really need the object to be mostly 
symmetrical around the axis it is spinning  
on. Minor defects are okay, even intentional 
ones like dimples and rises to allow valleys  
or hills without using lots of extra dirt 
and rock. However, it doesn’t need to be  
symmetric down that axis of rotation, so it could 
be pill-shaped instead of cylinder-shaped, and the  
gravity at the ends just gets lower as it narrows.
You could do some interesting low-gravity mountain  
ecologies in such places and it avoids some 
engineering issues with cylinder caps. And in this  
same way, you could do chains of such habitats 
narrowing and then widening again every so often,  
to allow a safety sphincter to be installed that 
could close, in order to separate the segments,  
and those wouldn’t need to be so huge. I think 
you might have a lot of river valley setups  
done this way too, as cylinder habitat mechanics 
allow for unlimited length, so you can basically  
set yourself up like a traditional Egyptian 
kingdom, 5 miles wide and the whole river long,  
which can potentially be millions of miles 
or longer, as we see with the Topopolis. 
But as we mentioned earlier, space habitats can 
also be made so that the way they generate gravity  
is by normal mass. We won’t dwell too long on this 
as we have a dedicated episode for Shell Worlds,  
even those with concentric layers, and a 
whole episode on massive Marine Habitat  
options including the Hydroshell. The Hydroshell 
is an interesting hollow world option which is  
intentionally low gravity, having very deep 
seas but only compared to Earth’s Oceans,  
not Earth’s entire radius, molten core and 
all. It’s basically a planetary crust minus  
the mantle and core, and covered in water. The low 
gravity is interesting in this because normally,  
our problem with doing deep sea habitats on space 
stations is that all the depth and mass is very  
rough on any spinning object, kilometers deep of 
sea is doable but really isn’t the optimal use of  
matter that we aim for with spinning habitats. 
Here though, you can have enormous deep sea  
environments where the pressure rises only very 
slowly with depth because of the lower gravity,  
and amusingly the gravity gets weaker as 
you descend, causing pressure to rise even  
more slowly, allowing for marine habitats of 
a depth which no planet could ever permit. See  
that episode, Oceans in Space, for details.
And this is the fundamentally coolest thing  
about space habitats. They permit more options, in 
that you can more closely replicate conditions on  
Earth than you ever could by terraforming 
any of the planets we currently know of,  
but you can also produce environments far stranger 
than anything likely to naturally occur. You could  
build for the perfect efficient city layout 
or suburban sprawl or the Country Club villa,  
or even a habitat for one family with a giant 
mansion, golf course, and forest all its own.  
And you aren’t building it on top of 
something somebody else once called home,  
but rather made from dead lifeless rock floating 
through empty space, or even starlifted, and way  
less of that rock than it would take to generate 
living area via a classic planet, where you need  
meters of rock and hull beneath you, not thousands 
of kilometers. The consumption for something like  
this would be much less, even using the shellworld 
option, hollow rock with a center stuffed full of  
dense abundant gas like hydrogen or helium, or 
even dark matter or an artificial black hole. 
Or you can cut down on the gravity and have 
immense hollow air-filled habitats a human  
could fly in by flapping their wings and in 
which oases of rock and sea might float to  
land on and on which life might grow. Indeed, 
you might grow space habitats organically,  
like giant trees growing out of asteroids by some 
hybridization of nanotech and genetic mastery. 
They let you make strange places for people to 
visit, or safe havens for nature to persist,  
or customized communities for families to 
prosper. As to motivations to make them,  
well there’s always just the need for more 
space to grow. Humanity may hit a temporary  
peak population sometime this century – personally 
I doubt it – but whether we do or not, if we did,  
that would be partially because people felt a 
concern about us not having enough space for  
more people, but a future with space habitats gets 
around that, and is very handy if we also have a  
future of extended longevity, where folks might 
be in good shape and still fertile, and look 20  
or 30, when they’re 200 or 300. So above all else, 
growing room is an option, both for more people  
and to upgrade how much space each person has.
But smaller habitats might also be important. It’s  
the safe place to bring your small sub-culture 
that you’re afraid will be drowned among its  
bigger neighbors or possibly burnt at the stake by 
them. For some religions, it can be the promised  
land, and technically even requires traveling 
the heavens to get to, and it is where they can  
be in isolation to the degree they want. So 
too for any number of ideologies or economic  
systems. It is ten million communes, each founded 
on their own to rise or fall on their own merits.  
It is the laboratory where you can experiment 
with genetics or nanotech without fear you’ll  
infect the local ecology and wreck an ecosystem, 
where a nuclear bomb in the basement can stop an  
unchained hostile AI from spreading out, or 
erase the evidence of the mistake or illegal  
enterprise. It is a safe training ground 
for militaries, free from enemy spying and  
risk to civilian populations or environments.
It is the giant Woodstock campground millions  
come to once a year to watch bands play for a 
couple weeks, and grows wheat or corn or cows  
the rest of the time. It is the mobile stadium 
on an eccentric orbit, whose team plays against  
local teams as it passes by their habitats. It 
is the University meant for quiet contemplation,  
it is the idyllic pasture or vineyard habitat that 
appears in so many poems and stories. It is the  
river a million miles long with riverboats 
that tour it over a century-long trip. 
It is the world where the Sun never sets, or 
where the sun rises at 8 am, peaks at noon,  
and sets at 8, because it doesn’t need to actually 
move at the same rate all day long. It’s the one  
where the day is 25 hours long, and a year is 
exactly 400 days. It’s a world where you can  
float in the crystal blue sea among endless 
archipelagoes of paradise-like tiny islands,  
or float in the air near the axis and just glide 
down when you’re done, and on which there may be  
entire layers of ecology kilometers high and deep.
It is a place for many wonders, though potentially  
many awful things too, private paradises 
whose insides are hidden from scrutiny,  
and which like some private island retreat, might 
include some nightmares. Fundamentally though,  
they offer us the chance to build almost any world 
we might dream of, and very, very many of them,  
as they create living areas thousands of times 
more efficiently from raw materials like asteroids  
than clumping them together as planets does. 
Quadrillions of O’Neill Cylinder Habitats could  
be supported in this solar system alone, all the 
size of a county and home to a million people each  
or maybe no one at all, just a habitat where 
some engineered creature taken from mythology  
like unicorns or dragons roam in peace, as a 
testament to our ingenuity, or ego, or maybe both. 
So, one more motivation to make them comes to 
mind, and perhaps as an even greater one than  
simply growing room for more humans. Rather, 
the desire for more to imagine, design, and  
build. To make entire new worlds is an ambition 
few would call feeble or wrong-headed I think,  
and as awesome as standing on a mountain 
peak is, it must surely pale in comparison  
to standing at the peak of a mountain 
that you imagined, designed, and built.
 
A future in space and of immense space habitats 
can sometimes seem like a distant and impossible  
goal, but it’s one we reach by learning a little 
more everyday. And that’s the same for us in  
our own life goals and learning. The secret to 
achieving huge learning goals and staying sharp  
for a lifetime is learning a little every day, 
and that’s a secret that is shared by so many  
of the world’s most successful and productive 
people. They learn something new every day.  
And if you think that sounds too hard or too 
time-consuming or just too overwhelming—then  
you haven’t tried Brilliant dot org.
Dream Big, then figure out the knowledge  
and skills you need to make those 
dreams a reality and pursue them,  
and let Brilliant be your partner. To really learn 
anything—you’ve got to do it. Brilliant’s visual,  
hands-on approach is such an effective and 
engaging way to master the key concepts  
behind today’s technology—which is critical 
to staying ahead. You can try it yourself  
with a 30-day free trial, and see what 
a difference it makes to learning math,  
science, and computer science, from 
the basics to advanced material. 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn a little something  
new every day. To get started for free, visit 
brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or click on the link in  
the description, and the first 200 people will get 
20% off Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
As usual, this episode featured a lot of art by 
various volunteer animators showing us awesome  
megastructures no one has ever animated 
before and often barely even sketched,  
and as much as AI Art has been improving, 
it’s not there yet. Those visuals are worth  
a thousand words when it comes to explaining these 
topics and I am grateful to all of those artists,  
who you can see in our credit roll at the 
end of each episode, and I wanted to give  
a special shout out today to my friend 
Neil Blevins, who recently released book,  
Megastructures, contains so many great pieces of 
mind-blowing art, some of which you saw today. 
Speaking of Mind-blowing, next week’s episode is 
going to take us to the edge of the galaxy and  
far beyond, as we contemplate not just journeys to 
other galaxies beyond the Milky Way or Andromeda,  
but even other superclusters, in “Intergalactic 
Voyages”. Then it will be time for our scifi  
Sunday episode, about surviving in the ruins 
of civilization after an apocalypse. Then two  
weeks from now we’ll look at the advanced 
technologies we’re using to explore ancient  
ruins, in “The Future of Archeology”.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
