This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We view our sun as eternal and stable, the
object around which the day revolves and which
has been and always will be, and yet it is
a whirling mass of chaos and storms of fire.
In September of 1859, a year-and-a-half before
the American Civil War began, 162 years before
this recording, Earth experienced the Carrington
Event, the most powerful geomagnetic storm
ever recorded.
Telegraph systems all over North America and
Europe went haywire.
Telegraph line towers buzzed and arced, sending
sparks to the ground.
In some places, the arcing started fires in
dry grass.
Several telegraph operators received severe
shocks, and in a few offices metal contacts
melted and papers near the wires caught fire.
With telegraphers busy putting out fires and
many lines shorting out, America’s only
fast long-distance communication network was
mostly shut down.
And that meant trains had to be postponed
too for safety.
Most interestingly though, or perhaps most
eerily to the bewildered operators, offices
connected by the lines that hadn’t shorted
out found that they could still send each
other messages even after they’d disconnected
their power supplies—and the signals were
actually clearer than normal.
Electricity was literally in the air--and
that’s not really where we want it.
The mid-19th century was not an era very reliant
on electricity or radio, so beyond those telegraph
disruptions and folks being able to see Aurora
for the first time in places it normally is
never seen, this event was not disastrous.
No event as powerful has happened since, and
a good thing too, as it would wreak havoc
on our modern high-tech infrastructure.
It’s hard to solidly estimate such things
in advance, but estimates of the worldwide
cost of the direct damage and aftermath are
in the $1 to $2 trillion range.
Antarctic ice core samples contain traces
of the Nitrogen Oxide produced in the atmosphere
by such heavy electrical activity, and that
data seems to indicate that the 1859 Carrington
Event was at least twice as big as any other
solar storm of the past 500 years.
Lesser but still significant events happen
far more frequently, typically driven by solar
flares, and we have good reason to think our
own sun is atypically stable, though we’re
not at all certain how common they are on
other stars like our Sun.
Indeed many fluctuate in their output so sharply
and frequently that there is no plausible
scenario for an Earth-like world to exist
around them.
And even where Earth-like planets do exist,
frequent Carrington-like Events might severely
hamper development of a high-tech civilization
if not make it impossible.
So today we will be examining how the stability
of stars might affect the Fermi Paradox, the
big question of why in a Universe so vast
and ancient we don’t seem to detect vast
numbers of ancient civilizations out among
the stars.
Needless to say, things that might make those
stars less hospitable to life on worlds around
them could impact that equation.
“That Equation” incidentally is Drake’s
Equation, which is paired to the Fermi Paradox
and tries to look at various factors that
might make star systems able to host life,
and life that could reach the point it was
giving off signs of intelligent civilizations
to astronomical observers.
We refer to these sorts of hurdles to intelligence
arising, these hurdles to going from random
lifeless rocks to interstellar empires, as
“Filters”.
These might be minor ones that would only
eliminate most candidates, what we often call
a lesser filter, or enormous ones that a world
has slimmer chances of passing through than
you or I do of winning the Lottery, and we
call these the “Great Filters”, and we
discuss both types and everything in between
in our Fermi Paradox Great Filters series.
Great Filters are those events or conditions
that would reduce the odds of an alien civilization
developing by a million fold, and an example
might be if it turned out the typical solar
system had 100-kilometer-wide asteroid collisions
with planets on an average of every few thousand
years.
If we contemplate an event like that, which
would kill all complex life on a planet hit
by it, then we’re talking about something
that at best would set back the evolutionary
clock hundreds of millions of years if not
sterilizing the whole planet.
If we’re assuming there’s a period of
time the average system has of that happening
with a 50% likelihood, then if 10 such periods
elapsed, the odds of it not happening become
one-half to the 10th power, or one in a thousand,
and at 20 iterations, one in a million, and
at 30 iterations, one in a billion.
Now planets really do often get smacked with
asteroids or even dwarf planets, that’s
probably how we got our giant moon – itself
another commonly suggested Fermi Paradox Filter
– and we don’t know how often such collisions
happen in the typical system.
If that period was once in a million years,
then less than one in a thousand systems might
host life, if it was a thousand years then
the odds of even a single planet in the whole
Universe going 4 billion years without being
fatally smashed multiple times is pretty small.
But that’s a critical aspect of filters
of that type, a disaster that might happen
on average every million years changes the
odds by many orders of magnitude difference
in the 4 billion year history of a possible
life bearing planet.
Small changes in the odds of filter events
result in large changes to the odds of technological
life arising, and unfortunately our understanding
of the odds of most filters is still very
imprecise.
And mind you, these cases are in addition
to any other filters in play, and throughout
the aforementioned Great Filter Series we
discussed over 50 such conditions which each
seemed likely to reduce the odds by at least
50% in each case, often vastly more.
One of those areas was Solar stability and
the general category of suitability of a given
star, and it is one of the ones I expect to
be a big filter on life emerging and evolving,
as we’ll discuss today in terms of solar
flares.
Though Solar Flares are just one example of
how, but let’s begin with that.
What is a solar flare?
The Sun gives off a fairly steady amount of
sunlight – indeed it appears to be steadier
than most stars – but it still has drops
and rises in brightness, and the latter are
called solar flares, eruptions on the Sun,
which also increases the overall brightness
of the Sun while they persist.
They usually are observed in close proximity
to sunspots, which are temporary phenomena
on the Sun that are actually darker than normal.
Loosely speaking this can be thought of as
a big bubble of activity manifesting as a
clump of darker sunspots and a sudden flash
of hot and bright activity, that flare.
Sunspots range in size a lot, varying from
the size of a city to bigger than a planet,
even a big one like Jupiter.
They move around, often in groups, and change
in size, and appear and disappear, and how
common they are at any given moment changes
and seems to loosely follow an 11-year cycle.
They are often accompanied by other activities
like solar flares.
We have coronal loops, which are giant ribbons
of plasma rising and falling with magnetic
field lines off the sun, thousands of kilometers
long, and we also have their big brother,
solar prominences, which are bigger and last
longer.
These can break up into a Coronal Mass Ejection,
or CME, which is basically where one of these
large protrusions of plasma breaks off, and
our Sun has as many as 5 of these a day during
the peak of that 11 year cycle to as few as
one every five days near the minimum, a factor
of 25 difference.
These head out into space and only the ones
that move in the direction of Earth are cause
for concern – currently anyway, they could
be more worrisome in a developing interplanetary
civilization with infrastructure spread out
around its star.
Now as we often note on the show, Earth is
very small compared to our Sun and even smaller
compared to its orbit around the Sun, so it
only gets about a billionth of its sunlight,
and only gets about a billionth of its CME
ejected material.
They are big and spread out as they go, so
a lot more than one in a billion strike Earth,
but the vast majority of CME’s either come
nowhere near us or hit us only with their
fringe.
At the same time not all Mass Ejections are
made equal, some are bigger than others.
The Carrington Event in 1859 was visible to
the naked eye as a flare and a brightening
of the solar disc, most are not nearly that
intense.
But nor is that intensity super-rare either,
we had a Carrington-Class solar superstorm
back in the summer of 2012 that landed a glancing
blow on Earth, and, had it been head on, we
estimated it would have done around a trillion
dollars in infrastructure damage, resulting
in huge human and societal costs while we
rebuild.
We would expect cascading failures of the
power grid, electric disruptions and grid
damage, potentially leaving some areas without
power for months, and where we kept power,
huge problems in terms of electronic payments
systems, crashes to the internet, and general
chaos in banking in general.
It’s hard to guess how much secondary chaos
this might cause, but as we emerge from the
Pandemic, it’s worth remembering all the
stuff that came out of left field from that,
like the great Toilet Paper Shortage of Spring
2020 or shortages of various food items simply
from an inability to keep the processing plants
open.
So don’t think of such an event as just
a few days of rolling blackouts.
We were actually hit by a smaller one in the
Spring of 1989 that knocked out power in Quebec
and the aurora was visible down in Florida
and Texas.
Hardly a doomsday event though.
I was eight at the time of the ‘89 event,
living in northeast Ohio, not far from Quebec,
and was already very into astronomy and also
already a news junkie, but I can’t say I
recall the news even mentioning it, that time
Earth got smacked by a coronal mass ejection
36 times bigger than the planet.
And this is critical because we have not observed
any CMEs that would have brought on the apocalypse
had they hit Earth directly.
At worst the ones we have seen would have
caused short term chaos and economic disruption
of power outages and fried communication systems.
There probably have been much worse ones,
and yet they are nothing compared to what
planets around many other stars experience.
We have a category of stars called variable
stars, with the variation referring to their
brightness, and presumably they all vary in
brightness but, for example, our own sun’s
brightness only varies by about 0.1% over
the eleven year solar cycle, just by a factor
of a thousandth, and that variation is enough
to cause a variation of 400% in the dangerous
UV-B light reaching Earth through the Ozone
layer, a possible planet wide temperature
variation of about a fifth of degree Celsius,
and possibly some alteration of weather patterns.
Alternatively Mira type Variable Stars can
have variation of not a thousandth, but of
a factor of a thousand or more.
They’re an extreme case but most stars vary
in brightness by a lot more than a tenth of
a percent.
Our sun is unusually stable, and I just mentioned
a few of the effects even a 0.1% variation
in brightness has.
A coronal mass ejection an order of magnitude
more powerful than the Carrington-event is
getting into that region where the effects
aren’t just messing up electronics and making
the sky have pretty auroras, it's getting
into the area where it can start severely
damaging the atmosphere.
Remember a CME is a giant ball of plasma,
we were just talking early this month about
using plasma as a weapon for tearing stuff
apart in our Lightsabers and Laser Pistols
episode.
Plasma is hot ionized atoms, the same kind
that already hit Earth as Solar Wind but dialed
up to 11, that’s the same solar wind that
slowly strips off our atmosphere and which
stripped them off every planet without a strong
enough combination of magnetosphere and gravity
to keep theirs.
There are a lot of variable stars – and
there are several types and causes for star
variability, ranging from the internal mechanics
of the star, what we call intrinsic variability,
to extrinsic causes like passing through a
dust cloud and gas cloud.
However a lot of variable stars are already
so big that we rule them out for the Fermi
Paradox, as we tend to assume a big but short
lived star would not be around long enough
to let complex life evolve near it.
Indeed even Class F Stars, those just one
category above our own G2 Sun, are pretty
dubious candidates for longterm stable Earth-like
worlds as we’ll discuss in a bit, and the
most massive of those come in at only 1.4
times the mass of our sun, and yet 40% more
mass should result in a main-sequence lifetime
of only 4.3 billion years, our sun is 4.6
billion years old, and 300 millions years
ago life had barely gotten onto land.
Stars more massive than that, anything in
the A, B, or O ranges live even shorter lives,
often making their lifetimes in millions rather
than billions of years.
To be sure, life might evolve faster on some
worlds, but stars also get brighter as they
age and hotter, and we worry if our world
will even have an atmosphere a couple billions
years from now if our Sun heats up a bit more.
This sort of star variability, brightness
from aging, is much slower but more potent
in many ways too, as every star emits solar
wind that strips atmosphere off worlds, and
there’s a bit of snowball effect on that,
once the stripping effect reaches a certain
strength things move very fast, removing sea
and sky.
For instance a star living only half as long
as our own sun is going to go through those
age-related changes in brightness twice as
fast, giving the ecologies under them half
the time to adapt, assuming they even can.
Whichever the case, it makes it very dubious
if stars even a decent bit more massive than
ours could really offer a habitable zone to
an Earth analogue planet for long enough that
evolution could produce intelligence, even
if that bigger and shorter-lived star was
as stable as our sun.
And again our sun is pretty stable even when
compared to other stars in our type, at least
for the last several thousand years, which
is as far back as we can track it using means
like ice cores and tree rings.
With such a short record, it might be that
the Sun has just been unusually calm during
this era.
However the Sun is the major driving influence
of our weather and climate, and we have had
a lot of big climate shifts over that same
period, largely driven by that solar activity
which has varied minimally.
When compared to a graph of brightness variability
of other stars like our own, our sun is very
sedate and stable, and if this is the norm,
the instability of most Sun-like stars might
be a major filter for the Fermi Paradox.
Even if it were a temporary period though,
we know how much damage the variability of
our Sun could do to a technological civilization.
You can bury and harden power lines and telephone
wires against this sort of disruption but
you have to put a lot of effort and expense
into doing that – we’re not idiots, we
haven’t proofed ourselves against this because
it would take a major effort and its uncertain
if the cost of doing and maintaining that
would exceed the possible damage, especially
since a lot of that would be because of chinks
in our armor, like one country or region didn’t
do it and all their networks drop.
We also might want to ask what Carrington
Events happening every year or even more often
or more severely might do to a developing
civilization.
One thing we need to understand is that even
for very stable stars, the slow and steady
stellar wind that all stars give off will
slowly strip away the atmosphere of any planet—unless
that planet is so large it can hold its atmosphere
down with brute force gravity, or unless the
planet is so far from its sun that the wind
is weak, or unless the planet has a geomagnetic
field to create magnetosphere that will guide
all those charged wind particles safely away
from the atmosphere.
But huge planets and distant cold planets
are unlikely to develop life, so life as we
know it has the best chance of developing
on planets that have a geomagnetic field protecting
the atmosphere.
Mars has a much thinner atmosphere than Earth’s
partly because of its lighter gravity but
mostly because it lack of a magnetic field,
so the solar wind has stripped and is still
stripping its atmosphere away.
Life evolving on a planet with barely an atmosphere
isn’t necessarily impossible, but it isn’t
nearly as probable either.
And since our data on planetary atmospheres
and magnetic fields is very limited, we can
only make estimates as to how intense a geomagnetic
field a planet really needs to protect its
atmosphere from its sun at its orbital distance
from that sun.
But even if a planet has a strong enough magnetic
field and magnetosphere to protect its atmosphere
from the steady stellar wind, there are still
the storms and flares to worry about.
We can only make estimates of how much of
the Earth’s atmosphere the Carrington Event
blasted away, so while it would take frequent
Carrington-class events to leave us airless,
it’s not clear exactly how frequently.
And there’s an interesting range in there,
where the magnetic field might be strong enough
to hold the atmosphere in place but we’d
still have the intense erratic electrical
activity to deal with.
In a way, we’re actually very lucky the
Carrington Event happened when it did.
Had it come decades earlier, there would not
have been astronomers monitoring the Sun daily
and we might not have realized that all the
strange events were connected with the gigantic
sunspots that had just erupted.
Had it come much later, of course, we’d
have already invested heavily and come to
depend on an electrical grid that was completely
unprepared for it.
Though if it had happened early on in our
electrification efforts, we may have re-evaluated
and instituted more rigorous standards for
our electric infrastructure.
So an Earthlike planet that suffered a few
Carringtons per decade couldn’t develop
a worthwhile electrical grid until they learned
to shield and harden it.
On the one hand, this might drive them to
work that much harder on their studies of
solar physics and electronics.
On the other hand, that extra hurdle might
make the whole idea of a grid impractical
and too expensive, leaving the planet’s
civilization dependent on cruder, less adaptable,
and more decentralized forms of power like
water power, and by water power I mean water
wheels driving gears, not hydroelectric power
generation.
If they cleared that hurdle, there are plenty
of others, like deploying a satellite network.
You can shield satellites, but it’s expensive
and difficult.
And even then, they need antennas or they
aren’t very useful.
If you shield an antenna completely it stops
being an antenna, but you can withdraw the
antenna and other vulnerable structures into
the shielding if you know a storm is coming.
So before this civilization could build their
satellite network, they need a sufficiently
advanced understanding of solar physics that
they can monitor their sun and know when it’s
about to act up.
It’s possible, but every hurdle placed in
a civilization’s way is a hurdle that some
aren’t going to get over.
And thinking for a moment about civilizations
at a lower level of technology, there’s
no telling what superstitions about metal
might develop if a culture noticed that long
pieces of metal got hot, gave off sparks,
and started fires on the days before the night
skies filled with green fire.
This could lead to a Game of Thrones-like
scenario, where a planet reaches a certain
level of technological development and just
stays there for thousands of years.
Some things are a lot more difficult to harden
though, like space based hardware, be it probes,
rovers, or manned stations.
We already have to work to minimize mass to
get things into space and arguably expose
our astronauts to unhealthy amounts of radiation
during their stays, it’s a lot worse during
storms like this and if that was the norm,
it might simply be viewed as an impossibly
impractical endeavor.
Personally I think they’d eventually get
the technology to do it anyway, but astronomy
and scientific development might look very
different on worlds where the sky was always
lit up with an aurora.
We don’t know how often major solar storms
like this would need to occur, or at what
intensity, to strip the atmosphere off Earth,
but we can make some decent guesses and there’s
a lot of stars that probably are too volatile.
As mentioned any of the variable types stars,
at least the intrinsically variable ones,
probably are not good candidates for Earth
Analogues.
As I also mentioned, a lot of the variables
are more massive stars too, ones too short
lived to have modern Earth-like worlds, but
these are tiny fraction of stars anyway.
The overwhelming super-majority of stars are
less massive than our own Sun and much longer
lived, and thus in terms of main-sequence
brightening with age, would be even slower
than our sun and give far longer for life
to develop.
However, these red and orange dwarfs that
make up the vast majority of stars, M and
K type stars, are basically all variable stars.
Red Dwarfs are frequently covered in sunspots
and can be dimmed by nearly half of normal
for months at a time.
Some months back we looked at colonizing red
dwarfs and noted various ways they could have
seasons, given that a planet close enough
to them to have liquid water might orbit in
mere days for the dimmest, and only a few
months for the biggest and brightest.
I didn’t mention it at the time as an option
for seasons but it might well be periodic,
and having your sun dim periodically by a
decent fraction is one such option for seasons.
For folks contemplating another Game-of-Thrones
Westeros style world for a story or game,
heavy sunspots is one more way to cause what
we’d think of as atypical weather cycles.
Of course it’s also a reason a civilization
might get stuck in an iron age for thousands
of years, unable to move into modern electronics
because there were too many solar storms for
many electronics to be used safely and well
and catch on, but let's focus on the world’s
climate instead.
In and of itself, this is not necessarily
too problematic for life, most red dwarfs
don’t dim by that much that regularly, dimming
by nearly a half, even if it did that would
not necessarily be a dealbreaker on having
a livable planet.
As an example a 20% percent drop in light
hitting a planet would generally result in
a temperature about 5% colder in absolute
terms, or of an earthlike world, somewhere
between 15-20 Kelvin or Celsius drop, or 20-30
degree Fahrenheit drop.
Now mind you that’s the whole planet slowly
cooling, not just a seasonal change, and planets
are big things slow to heat and cool, so it's
not hard to imagine a lifecycle and ecosystem
able to handle such drops and adapt to them
being rather random for months at a time.
On the other hand, given that tidal locking
is often thought to be fairly common on such
worlds, it wouldn’t be too shocking if a
given star, especially the smallest of dwarfs
and closest of planets, actually had a solar
cycle that was periodic to that orbital period
of that close and massive satellite, tidal
forces go both ways after all, even if a planet
effects a star less than a star a planet,
much like us and our own moon.
So the dimming is problematic but not necessarily
fatal, however dimming isn’t the whole of
it for smaller stars, and much like our sun
they have flares that often accompany those
sunspots, and these can as much as double
the output of the star.
Also, while our own sun has a vast region
of space to spit coronal mass ejections without
them coming anywhere near Earth, the volume
and cross section habitable planets of red
dwarfs take up is much higher, a habitable
planet around the dimmest of red dwarfs, being
10,000 times dimmer than our Sun, would have
10,000 times the proportional cross-section
for intercepting things flying away from that
star, getting hit or clipped by them far more
often, and they would only have had a fraction
of the distance and time to disperse upon
leaving their Sun.
So smaller suns are a lot more volatile and
a lot more likely for that volatility to whack
habitable planets around them more frequently
and more potently.
Indeed we often worry such worlds might not
be able to maintain atmospheres at all, or
lose them much easier and faster, which eliminates
the big advantage of them as potential sources
for advanced life, that such stars live far
longer and allow more time for life to emerge
and develop.
On the one hand a conceivable variation of
10% in brightness should be manageable for
an ecology, after all a planet on a mildly
elliptical orbit could experience that much,
Earth at its closest and furthest varies in
total brightness by about 7%.
On the other hand we see what even a 0.1%
fluctuation in solar luminosity over an 11
year cycle can do, and in the wider timelines
we tend to suspect there is a longer solar
cycle or more than one even, many have been
proposed in terms of ice ages.
Other stars won’t have 11 year cycles, incidentally
ours is the Sun’s north and south magnetic
pole reversing, the sun has a very strong
and wild magnetic field and is composed of
ionized plasma, which is what is driving the
eruptions, but we don’t know that this has
always been an 11 year cycle and always will
be, and it should be different for every star,
based on its composition, age, spin rate and
other factors.
We are going to need much more detailed, long-term
observations of our sun and nearby systems
to better define the Drake Equation.
Until then though, we need to consider the
very real chance that planets like Earth might
be rare for life to evolve on because stars
as stable as our own Sun are much rarer than
we think.
I was mentioning today how stable our Sun
is compared to many other stars but it’s
still impossible to describe how explosive
and volatile our Sun is, with the equivalent
of millions of atomic bombs going off on its
surface every moment, and there’s a great
video examining this over on Curiositystream
called “Our Violent Sun”, one of their
many great astronomy and space episodes.
That’s also a notion that comes up in science
fiction a lot, with ships flying close to
stars to lure enemies into being hit by solar
eruptions or civilizations causing intentional
flares as weapons, and we will be discussing
the notion of using solar flares as a weapon
in an extended edition of today’s episode
over on Nebula, and for those watching on
Nebula rather than Youtube you can see that
extended version in place of our usual sponsor
spot.
Nebula is our rapidly-growing streaming service
where you can see all of our episodes ad and
sponsor free and a couple days early, as well
as some bonus content like our extended editions
or Nebula Exclusives like our Coexistence
with Alien series.
You can also see tons of content from many
other amazing creators and help support this
show while you’re at it.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see content like “Our Violent
Sun”,and watch all the other amazing content
on Curiositystream, and also all the great
content over on Nebula from myself and many
others.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
So that will wrap us up for today and we will
close the Month out on Sunday May 30th when
we will have our End of the Month Livestream
Q&A at 4pm Eastern Time, hopefully from our
new studio.
Then we will head into June with a look at
the concept of two alien races both evolving
civilizations on the same world, and if they
might share it in peace, then we will look
at some Future Manhattan Projects, which might
be handy for those who can’t share their
world in peace, and will follow that up with
a look at Death Rays.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us itunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
