Throughout history it has been common for
distant colonies to break away from their
homeland.
In a future where colonies are entire planets
and light years from home, shall history repeat
itself?
The colony fleet Artist of Heaven that arrived
in Beta Pictoris in 2998 after 63 light years
of travel was very loyal to their ancestors
on Earth, and Beta Pictoris was the third
colony they had founded since leaving the
Lagrange dockyards on a planned multi-millenia
journey.
Their small fleet was a gardener fleet, as
their called, colonial missions who might
spend a century between each stop, where they
would let out part of the crew to settle a
new world, stop to take on raw materials and
fuel, then move out to their next target,
manufacturing new colonial equipment and having
children to raise more colonists, expanding
and upgrading their ships and sometimes even
making new ships.
At each stop they do it again, letting off
anyone who wants to settle and helping set
the basic colony up while taking on materials
and plotting the next leg.
In turn those colonists would help send supplies
and information to that fleet, and help maintain
the infrastructure of relays and stellasers
that would permit future trade and immigration
to take place faster and easier.
The first two systems the fleet had colonized,
now known as Brush and Easel, were doing their
job admirably.
Indeed the first colonial reinforcement fleet
from Earth was already en route at nearly
half of light speed along the huge laser relays
now connecting those systems.
Beta Pictoris was planning to be the next
in that line, and special too.
The system was a young one, only about 12
million years old, and with many young planets
only partially formed and rich in raw materials.
They were going to be such a rich mining system
that they could profitably export metals back
to the Sol System itself and its ever growing
demand for raw materials to build its emerging
Dyson Swarm.
The raw materials were so abundant and easily
claimed that the Colonial Fleet decided to
divide itself earlier than planned, creating
a second fleet, Artist’s Apprentice.
With two fleets instead of just one, they
could branch off into a new line of colonies.
This turned out to be trickier than planned,
and there was a great shuffling of personnel
settling or remaining on the fleet, or being
moved to the new fleet.
Lots of new titles and rank in the fleet to
be bestowed.
A lot of people who suddenly had a chance
at a promotion decided to stay with the fleet
instead.
This deprived the fledgling colony of many
experts and good leaders.
All at the same time, they were being told
they needed to be ready to support two new
relay chains, not just one, and a tech update
package from home that improved engine speed
meant they needed to get those relays running
even sooner.
Shortly after the fleet departed, they began
noticing that the wear and tear on all their
space mining operations and power collectors
was far worse than planned.
The system simply had too much scattered matter
not yet clumped into planets, and while they
thought they had accounted for it, maintenance
needs were coming in higher than planned.
At the same time, they were running with only
about 60% of the spaceship technicians they
originally planned and many of the best had
left with either fleet.
In 3048 they received word that the first
freighter was inbound to their system to pick
up a cargo of refined metals to return to
Sol, against their standing contract to receive
technical updates from home, and they didn’t
expect to have that cargo ready without delaying
other vital projects.
The freighter was expected to arrive quickly
as it was mostly empty, with a few valuable
but low-mass cargos brought in from Easel,
one part trade items, one part gifts to their
youngest new sibling system.
In 3062 the Reinforcement Fleet Canvasser
left the dockyards at Neptune, not long after
word reached the Sol System of Beta Pictoris’s
successful colonization.
They expected an arrival at the system as
early as 3188 AD, but were coming by way of
Easel, the second colony in the chain.
In 3071 the freighter arrived and their captain
was disappointed to see Beta Pictoris, now
an active colony for 73 years, was not thriving
as much as hoped.
She began to suspect that they were in even
worse straits and not simply putting on a
brave face but actively being dishonest in
their stunted progress.
She asked to speak to the Colonial Governor,
an old friend of hers as a midshipman on the
Artist of Heaven’s flagship 150 years ago.
She was told he had died in an accident recently
and that things had become somewhat chaotic
as a result.
She believed this and accepted their request
for a delay.
When the colony asked for the materials on
board her ship she declined and asked for
a personal face to face meeting with the new
governor.
The final message from the freighter’s XO
was that his captain’s shuttle had been
destroyed and that he suspected foul play.
A message from Peta Pictoris Alpha colony
shortly afterward claimed that captain’s
shuttle had been destroyed by space debris,
and that she must not have recalibrated the
ship for the more intense micrometer activity
in the system.
A second message roughly a day later claimed
that the freighter had been seized by separatist
pirates, and that the captain’s shuttle
may have been destroyed by them rather than
by accident.
Analysis at the Easel system conducted on
the signal from the freighter to them indicated
that it was jammed.
No previous mention of separatist activity
had been included in any report.
They concluded that there was now a high probability
that Beta Pictoris had gone renegade, as some
other systems had in other colonial efforts.
Messages and probes were immediately dispatched..
In 3115 Beta Pictoris received word from Neptune
that the Canvasser fleet had departed and
was en route.
Neptune and Earth would first hear about the
concerning activity at Beta Pictoris in 3134,
19 years later.
In 3140 Fleet Canvasser received word from
the Easel system that Beta Pictoris still
had not completed a stopping laser at their
system, and that their intelligence analysts
had grave concerns about the veracity of any
reports coming from there.
If the Canvasser Fleet continued at full speed
they would not be able to decelerate there
if the relay system was not online.
If it were online but in hostile hands, it
could instead be used as a weapon.
Decisions are hard, and all they see is a
distant past, not the present, once hostile
hands might have since been overthrown or
succeeded by more moderate voices in the present.
For the interstellar traveler, you leapfrog
through time to each new destination, not
just space, and generations pass between stops,
so their attitudes can change greatly and
thus you must be prepared to change your mission
too.
What should Canvasser do?
Canvasser’s admiral has a large fleet focused
entirely on peace and trade, but is excellently
well-trained and saw action during the revolt
on Triton in 2786.
He agrees to Easel System’s plan to slow
and maneuver his fleet by using both their
laser relay system and sending large fuel
pods in front of his fleet at carefully coordinated
speeds and locations to allow them to capture
and refuel from them, and thus arrive at Beta
Pictoris at best possible speed.
They anticipate arrival in the year 3220,
giving the admiral 80 years to convert his
fleet to handle a possibly belligerent colony.
Easel System is still a relatively new colony,
and can provide only limited aid, but they
have dispatched a large number of probes toward
Peta Pictoris and included communication & signal
access to them to the Canvasser Fleet.
Nonetheless they will be entering the situation
with very confused and limited intel, and
at very high speed.
The colony would have just as many decades
to prepare for an attack, so the admiral commands
intensive military training in virtual reality
for all the crew and shifts on board production
from terraforming equipment to weapons systems.
Flyby probes of Beta Pictoris are returning
limited information of use, and often failing
when passing through the system, while lower
speed and decelerating probes to monitor the
system are all failing within weeks or months
of arrival and presumed destroyed.
In 3116, after succeeding in their first rendezvous
with a fuel pod from Easel, the admiral issues
a stern warning and command to Beta Pictoris,
telling them to prepare to surrender all administrative
control to the admiral, who will institute
martial law until the matter is dealt with.
No spaceship is to exceed 1% of light speed
in that system until further notice or will
be fired on.
Any spaceship, station, or installation above
a designated mass and power level will have
probes sent to them.
The destruction of that monitor probe will
immediately result in an attack on the facility
by the fleet.
If these terms are not agreed to by the time
the fleet reaches 2 light months from Beta
Pictoris they will open fire on any and all
significantly sized facilities and vessels
with guided relativistic slugs.
In 3119, Canvasser Fleet hit the red line,
61 light days out from Beta Pictoris, and
no surrender message had yet been received.
So, the question now becomes, what the heck
is going on at Beta Pictoris?
I’ve tried to leave this intentionally vague
because my own reading of history is that
a lot of conflicts occur because there’s
an unclear picture of motivation and capability.
Here, Canvasser Fleet’s admiral has no idea
if Beta Pictoris is actively hostile or not,
but the closer their fleet gets and the more
they decelerate, the weaker the fleet’s
position.
At speed, every munition they have carries
devastating free energy, a handful of garbage
released out the side of the ship to strike
an immobile facility would be as powerful
a nuke, and we’re assuming a fleet massing
on an order of many trillions of pounds or
kilograms.
As they slow, they not only lose that advantage
but also have to burn fuel that could propel
more ordnance in order to slow down.
They also need to fear the reverse, that the
opposition might have put a minefield in front
of them.
That even a tiny and slightly stealthy drone
with a little guidance package could race
into their path, on a trajectory their normal
collision detectors aren’t as vigilant in
looking at, and at that speed, a collision
with a fist-sized unarmed drone would have
the same energy as a nuclear weapon.
The colony, if their intent is hostile, gains
nothing by alerting the approaching fleet
that they are hostile.
Thus even silence might be reasonably interpreted
as belligerent behavior.
As we say on the show a lot, there is no such
thing as an unarmed spaceship, which cuts
both ways, and that colony ship bringing more
people to a friendly new colony would have
little problem transforming into a warship
full of elite shock troops during that journey.
Gardener ships by their nature breed and train
folks up on their journeys and even without
turning to cloning or building war robots,
they can produce staggering pools of labor
or soldiers in their decade long journeys
to each new place.
But the same is true of that colony.
A century is a long time to arm yourself,
and you are not limited by the raw materials
and fuel in your cargo hold when you begin
the trip.
Strictly speaking neither was that fleet,
they could be decelerating bits of their fleet
to land on rogue planetoids in interstellar
space, mine them, and then fire cargo pods
of material to that fleet, as could their
last friendly port of call.
But those stopping to mine along the way could
then return to the trip themselves, to catch
up later, and one of the lagging vessels could
be the missile boat that isn’t going to
slow down and can still be at high speed when
the main fleet decelerated into the system
and can send that lagging ship orders to fire
relativistic slugs at targets.
But the system maintains an advantage over
the fleet in gathering and utilizing materials.
Key thing though is that neither party has
any clear incentive to be honest once things
get tense or to trust the other side, and
the situation has all the components of a
Mexican standoff, where no clear strategy
exists for any entity to achieve a victory
without crushing losses and from which they
can’t safely extricate themselves.
Canvasser Fleet could have stopped at the
Easel System or detoured elsewhere, indeed
those split fleets, Artist of Heaven and Artist’s
Apprentice, are generally zig-zagging out
from Earth.
The systems on their path are several degrees
off course from each previous leg, and moving
on a straight line to one of them would take
them at least many light weeks wide of Beta
Pictoris.
That system’s whole population, even with
epic growth rates, still wouldn’t fill a
single large metropolis or medium-sized nation,
let alone feel provoked by such a wide detour.
But with all that light lag, Canvasser has
no way of knowing if either of those fleets
is still on those courses, literally and metaphorically.
They don’t know if Beta Pictoris might be
the first rebel colony of rebel fleets planning
to leave independent colonies in their wake.
Colonists are predisposed to an independent
streak after all.
They don’t even know if those fleets might
have turned around to protect Beta Pictoris.
A fleet could possibly have been lied to and
told that Earth had fallen to tyrants and
the fleet was coming to crush them into line.
And again we don’t know that it didn’t,
I didn’t say and Earth has probably been
broadcasting news the whole time and even
without some big internal shift or coup, think
of how much our civilization changed in a
couple centuries.
Most of the audience for this show is from
the US, the UK, or one of its other former
colonies or close neighbors.
We do not too closely resemble the England
of the Age of Sail that grew that empire and
I don’t think any existing branch of that
period is anxious for rule by King Charles
over Oliver Cromwell or George the Third over
Geroge Washington or vice versa.
Interstellar travel requires lifetimes and
no great evil need occur to lead to places
very unaligned with their former partner’s
current state.
You could make a good case that we’ve all
grown together over the decades as in our
proximity we’ve shared a lot of the same
struggles and probably influenced the outcomes
of each other.
One country bans slavery or gives women the
vote and the others tend to tilt that way
a bit more, but when divided by light years
and signal lag, that’s unlikely to be the
case.
I left many other things vague too.
Maybe Beta Pictoris had a coup, one of the
ship officer’s from the fleet felt passed
over for a command when the fleet’s split
and was relegated to the colony and decided
they should be in charge.
Maybe the governor died in a shuttle accident,
it’s a young colony pressed to dangerous
efforts at settlement and production, and
we did say Beta Pictoris was ultra-dense on
micro meteors and also flooded with ultraviolet
radiation compared to our own system, and
likely that radiation is very hard on sensitive
equipment like detectors.
We don’t know if that captain’s shuttle
was destroyed by a random rock or pirated
by some miniscule faction.
Maybe angry dockworkers feeling overloaded
with work took her hostage and the station
command ordered signals jammed, which would
be reasonable.
Maybe the freighter got belligerent over their
captain’s death and provoked battle and
lost, and Beta Pictoris realized how bad that
looked, how bad their fudging the numbers
to keep upbeat was now looking, and panicked.
And a generation later they’ve self-rationalized
their behavior as justified against a tyrannic
homeworld – just look at the TV they’ve
been sending recently, they’ve gone nuts.
Maybe they were shooting at the probes or
maybe those probes were just getting wrecked
easier inside that micro-meteor-rich proto-planetary
system.
Or maybe they turned to using more AI than
was safe to help with their production shortfalls
and the system is now one giant paperclip
maximizer or gray goo nightmare.
Maybe they have been talking to the fleets
artist of Heaven and Artist’s Apprentice
and they did turn around and are coming back.
Or they’re not, they’re appalled at what
Earth’s become and are making best time
on unpredictable paths to far, far away and
Beta Pictoris is fortifying that system like
crazy to block that fleet and cover the escape.
The population will fight to death and send
scans of their uploaded minds to a probe sent
out to capture those and transmit them to
the fleet before dropping itself into a star.
Scifi is full of rebel colonies and where
they aren’t straight adaptations of historical
events then they tend to assume an oppressive
homeworld sending in the marines to capture
the poor and anarchic but fundamentally good-hearted
rebel colony planet.
That can certainly happen but frequently there
are always at least two sides to a civil war
and rarely does either have a monopoly on
good or bad behavior.
We can list off the sorts of things that inspire
rebellions and they should be true in the
future too, and I’m not sure even a post-scarcity
colony would be immune to feeling stolen from
or robbed by their home system, but I think
it would limit that reason more.
So too, we’ve noted that most people won’t
live on planets, but instead on space habitats,
which are inherently mobile, so a rebel colony
can flee into the void and their home system
can just recolonize that spot if they feel
it had special strategic value.
It doesn’t eliminate the need for conflict
over that, but I think it does limit it.
What’s left?
Well, light lag is the big one.
It makes a rebellion seem way more possible,
for one, as in Beta Pictoris’s case, they
knew they had 63 years before Earth even heard
about that shuttle incident, and at least
twice that time before a fleet could arrive
from there.
Whereas their predecessor or neighboring colonies
are still too young and small to be sending
armadas of their own their way.
Imagine tomorrow we found out that some island
of a few hundred that we claimed as a territory
had declared independence 200 years ago and
we just found that out because some bureaucrat
forgot to pass the letter on to congress or
parliament and that island just shrugged,
flew their own flag, and kept up trade and
tourism, and the rare visitor just assumed
the king was the local tribal chieftain and
part of some local equivalent to a renaissance
fair for travelers.
Is this really very likely to end in carriers
and cruisers and marines arriving to handle
this rebellion?
And if it did, are they really going to stand
a chance?
Some colony world of a million people might
be facing a home world of trillions.
Or more.
And the answer is yes, which is the other
half of this equation.
It is hugely expensive in time and resources
to mount interstellar expeditions and the
big thing that makes that cheaper and affordable
is lots of automation.
Smart automation.
But a bunch of clanking self-replicators in
our own solar system can be overseen by people,
who are plentiful still, and with none of
that automation smarter than dogs and maybe
programmed for that sort of loyalty too.
It’s a lot more of concern with interstellar
von Neumann probes who have little oversight.
They need total control and decision making,
even if dumb as door knobs or programmed for
utter loyalty, because they must be able to
decide what to do next and able to reproduce
and repair completely on their own.
That’s not required for clanking self-replicators
at home.
But a rebel colony fearing an attack from
despots at home has far more reason to risk
dangerously productive and independent AI,
to help buildup their war machine and run
it, and also has that as its WMD.
By and large the purpose of nukes in modern
diplomacy, war, and strategy is a defensive
one, if you’ve got them no one wants to
try invading you or making you desperate.
They don’t really have much offensive value,
strange though that sounds, unless only you
possess them, and the key there is that folks
believe you will use them if you are desperate
and feeling like you have nothing to lose,
typically the case if you are the invaded
rather than the invader.
Dangerously mucking around with AI is the
equivalent of that for a colony world and
likely to involve the same dynamics, you walk
a thin line between turning every hand against
you or your aggressor, because they don’t
care about you much, but they do care about
flotillas of berserker AI space leviathans
being unleashed.
This is interesting because it means there’s
a good chance any such rebel would have installed
lots of safeguards anyway and not be unleashing
Skynet, but something more Scorched Earth,
and I could easily see that meaning large
swathes of space got full of fairly dumb but
dangerous von Neumann infestations.
One of your cheapest tricks that’s likely
to be seen as principally defensive and low
danger to others is to unleash those probes
to set up a system wide Kessler Syndrome event
out past your inner colonies, something akin
to the proto-planetary disc damage issue we
had at Beta Pictoris, as that’s exponentially
more dangerous to interstellar vessels coming
in at speed and flyby probes.
This is also a good defense against obvious
attacks like relativistic kill missiles from
the out-system, though hardly a foolproof
one and not one that gives you any offensive
advantage itself.
So there is definitely room for interstellar
colonies to go rebel and feel like they have
a real chance at achieving independence, even
outnumbered thousands to one, and indeed this
is a lot of the reason we tend to assume that
interstellar empires in a No-FTL universe
are more in the nature of loose confederacies
with a shared charter of fundamental rights
and principles and etiquette about interstellar
trade and communication.
The greater the inconvenience you can cause
by disrupting someone – up to and including
obliterating them, which is very inconvenient
– the greater your ability to get them to
agree to things that are not obviously beneficial
to them.
This could still include tithes though.
For instance, Earth is very likely to have
a quasi-monopoly on technological advancement
over its interstellar colonies for at least
the next ten thousand years, and is likely
to expect some recompense for that.
It is likely also to be the source of raw
materials and fuel for those colony ships,
and a standard deal might be something like
implied for Beta Pictoris.
As you get established, starting with a mostly
symbolic tithe, we expect repayment at high
interest for that investment.
We gave you a megaton of steel for your ship,
we expect you to send back 100 megatons, 1
a decade for the next millennia.
Or to pay it forward, you must give over a
ship and crew to the grand settlement alliance
within three centuries of the planetfall of
your colonists.
Or both, and until then you get free technical
updates from home and have cataclysm insurance.
If the colony just isn’t making it, you
can send out the we-are-screwed beacon and
put all your civilization on ice till pickup
if needed.
After that period you can arrange a more long
term trade deal but have to agree to the galactic
compact on safe trade and information relaying
or so on.
Again it's nothing very onerous and everyone
else on board with it is likely to view you
with distrust or contempt if you decline on
failing to meet your obligations.
This is a battlefield of reputation, where
being known for honesty and stability is probably
critical, though as with any other battlefield,
having a lot of guns and battlecruisers sure
does help.
For them, it’s like paying dues to your
local lodge or rotary, you might find it very
beneficial, but even if you mostly didn’t,
you probably keep paying them anyway because
you want the goodwill of the other members
and believe in the general concept, but there’s
no threat of retaliation if you leave, just
some eye-rolling and maybe some hard feeling
or dislike.
For their to be more than that, we’d have
to be considering some more top-heavy empire
and I just don’t see that in the cards for
interstellar colonies in a no-FTL universe,
especially with the defensive advantage of
time lag and scorched Earth options like von
Neumann Probes.
But that was interstellar colonies and it’s
worth remembering that your default settled
star system and a settled planet aren’t
any more synonymous than that planet is with
a single fertile river delta.
We looked at Beta Pictoris in the early 4th
Millenia, but back here on Earth we assume
a far larger inhabited system and reference
rebellion at Triton and dockyards at Neptune
and a Lagrange Point.
Our system doesn’t have 8 planets and maybe
9 if we count Pluto, it has several million
minor planets, including dozens of bigger
dwarf planets, then 4 big rocky terrestrial
ones, 2 Ice Giants, and 2 Gas Giants.
Most of those have moons, and a minor planet
just a few kilometers wide is already sufficient
to support the sorts of settlements we often
see in sci-fi doing the rebelling anyway.
Here the entire metric shifts, because we
definitely still have Scorched Earth options
in play, the colony can threaten to nuke itself
and the homeworld can threaten to nuke them.
The colony is very resistant to infantry attack,
they basically live in a mix of maze and castle
if they’re buried into some asteroid or
moon crater, but the homeworld probably has
overwhelming resources against something that
small if it needs to use them.
What’s more, there’s less likelihood there
is a ‘home world’ acting with unification.
Earth has 200 nations, people often tend to
assume one day it will be only one but it
is just as likely it’s home to even more
in the future and that a lot of smaller modern
nations on Earth would be capitals of local
interplanetary empires dwarfing any modern
superpower.
And while interstellar colonies can’t really
take advantage of factions back home, as it's
too far too coordinate, some colonies in our
asteroid belt can take advantage of internal
disunion and make allies with the current
minority party or the belligerent neighbor.
Making allies at the interstellar scale is
hard, at the interplanetary, everybody is
within a day’s communication time.
But you also have increased pariah issues,
as you can’t go around threatening to initiate
Kessler Syndrome in any area without turning
lots of hands against you.
Nor are they likely to tolerate messing around
with dangerous weapons like mass-synthesizing
antimatter or unleashing the replicator hoards,
and they are likely to have tight surveillance
on you and probably spies.
That internal factions issue cuts both ways,
as at the interstellar scale you probably
don’t have the invaders coordinating much
with any loyalist saboteurs or agents, but
they probably can at the interplanetary scale,
and a spy at this scale need not be anything
more than a spider sized drone with a camera
and comm laser.
We also don’t want to ignore options like
mass brainwashing technologies, to rid yourself
of possible rebels or traitors to the rebellion,
or an attack coming by a peace envoy landing
and secretly releasing self-replicating killbots
or nerve gas or a plague that kills everyone
or makes them zombie-like or loyal.
Tricks and treachery get a lot easier when
you’re not fighting light lag on every action
and when brute force seems less viable.
We do have an interesting case for in-between
though.
Out in the Kuiper Belt or beyond we have a
lot of room for colonies that are nowhere
near each other and where an outbreak of dumb
replication, for instance, doesn’t have
much raw material to quickly feed on.
Hence I could imagine all sorts of abandoned
or blighted rocks in space full of nasty machines
or colonists turned drooling savages by a
failed loyalty indoctrination bug.
In the depths of the Oort Cloud and its billion
icebergs in space we may have a time in the
future where millions of independent colonies
or minor confederations of them spread over
a light month act as borderline pirates, or
even outright pirates, while a million of
those icebergs lie in states of decay with
colonies full of crazed mutants or lobotomized
savages or near-mindless automata.
Which is a good reminder that you never need
FTL to have some good space opera or military
scifi, the solar system is beyond immense
and able to support civilizations dwarfing
any of the galactic empire sci-fi shows us.
One final note, and that's the idea that fear
of rebel interstellar colonies might be our
big answer to the Fermi Paradox, the big question
of where all the aliens are.
It is entirely likely that we will never get
near light spread travel and will creep out
at about 1% of light speed and settle our
own system and Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud
long before any interstellar colony gets much
inertia of its own.
We may decide that it’s seeing the space
around us, on every side, with rebels at best
and hegemonizing swarms at worst and that
colonization isn’t really worth it, and
that those early colonies might see that happening
to us and decide they’d rather not waste
their efforts at it either, so that no big
civilizations ever emerge, and the ones that
do turn out to be right in their fears and
get wiped out by some sort of semi-intelligent
AI.
Were that the case, it might be why we don’t
see any vast empires out there, because the
seeds of the empire they thought they were
sowing were merely the seeds of their own
destruction.
So today was all about distant space colonies
rebelling and a big factor in that is how
fast you can get people or ships there to
respond, and in the absence of FTL systems
like warp travel, we are limited to light
speed.
Ships going close to light speed are not only
hard to create but have a number of interesting
properties, like time and space dilation,
that we’ll be examining in this month’s
Nebula Exclusive, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships,
along with exploring what sorts of drive technology
could permit such speeds.
That’s out now on Nebula, where you can
not only see every regular episode of SFIA
a few days early and ad free, but all our
other bonus content, including extended editions
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives
like, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark
Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As An
Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or
& Free Will, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing
Binary Stars, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an ever-growing
community of creators.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only
get access to all of the great stuff Nebula
offers, you’ll also be directly supporting
this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So some weeks back we discussed a petition
to save the New Horizons Space probe started
by the National Space Society, which I currently
have the honor of being the President of,
and that petition was a great success that
saved New Horizons, and again it was this
audience that helped get that started and
funded, and thank you.
However, that’s just one of many projects
and goals the NSS works toward, everything
from space settlement to developing solutions
to energy and sustainability here at home,
and supporting international student competitions,
like designing space habitats.
In spite of the name, we are an international
organization with chapters around the world.
There’s a QR code on screen and a link in
the episode description that will take you
to a brief survey we’re doing to see what
members and like-minded folks think the NSS
should be focusing on, all information is
kept strictly private in the NSS, and you
can learn more about us, our goals, and how
to stay updated on them or join.
If you believe in a greater future in space
which we can all embrace, please take the
time to do this brief survey.
And Ad Astra!
That will wrap us up for today but we’re
just getting started with November and next
week is our 3-hour special, The Fermi Paradox
Compendium of Solutions & Terms.
And if that wasn’t enough content for one
week, or even a month, we will have our Scifi
Sunday episode on Human Alien Hybrids next
weekend.
Then we’ll visit Mars to discuss what kind
of Domes, if any, we should use there, and
how to make them, on November 16th.
Then we have an episode on Double Planet Systems,
one where two habitable planets might orbit
each other, and then on the 30th we’ll wrap
the month up with a look at Agriworlds, planets
or habitats entirely devoted to farming.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
