This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
 
Some say the world will end in fire, 
Some say in ice.
 
From what I’ve tasted of desire
I hold with those who favor fire.
 
Welcome to Science & Futurism with Isaac 
Arthur as we celebrate our 300th episode  
and take a look at how the Earth might come 
to an end, and we will be covering a range  
of options from natural to artificial, near term 
to far future, fiery to frozen. There are a lot  
of options, and this channel is not noted for 
any compulsion for brevity, especially for our  
300th episode special, so we’ll be here for a 
bit and grabbing a drink and snack is advised.
 
Fiery and frozen endings are probably the two 
most popular end of the world scenarios for  
contemplation, and we opened the episode with 
a quotation from famous poet Robert Frost’s  
classic, “Fire and Ice”, and for anyone whose 
curious Robert Frost is my favorite poet  
and Fire and Ice one of my favorites by him. 
There’s two reported inspirations for the poem,  
one being Dante’s Inferno and the other being a 
conversation Frost had with an Astronomer about  
the Sun exploding or extinguishing. 
Now that poem was written back in 1920,  
and the popular notion for the fate of stars 
at the time was that they were hot for the  
same reason planetary cores are hot – they heated 
under the immense gravity of their own formation  
and have been slowly cooling. Such being the 
case, stars would die off by slowly cooling and  
dimming and the worlds about them by freezing. 
Another notion that sometimes made the rounds  
was that there was a limit how many times a planet 
could make the rounds of its star, that its orbit  
would eventually decay from friction with gas 
and dust and perturbation from other planets.  
In such a scenario the planet falls 
into the Sun for a rather fiery death.
 
Later we found out that their heat was being 
replenished by the process of fusion, and that for  
most stars as that fuel runs out they expand and 
burn their inner solar system, and our knowledge  
of that has been improved and corrected upon 
since and we will discuss it as one option today.  
And I do mean option because as we will see today, 
even if the current modern theory is correct,  
there are several other competing options and 
scenarios for ending Earth in whole or part. 
 
But while the notion of gravitationally heated 
and slowly cooling stars was one of the first  
serious scientific stabs at the end of the 
world, it’s long been a topic of philosophical  
and theological discussions. We will not be 
discussing theology today, but it is always  
striking how often various end of the world 
scenarios suggested by science, and folks worry  
over the most, seem to line up with those we find 
in various religions, mythologies, and folklore.  
Whether it is prophetic or gives an insight 
into human psychology I obviously can’t say,  
but as we do go through options today that 
represent fiery or frozen ends, or which  
resemble some other apocalyptic scenario like Grey 
Goo self-Replicating Robots being analogous to a  
swarm of locusts, we should keep in mind that 
which end of world scenario is most poetic is  
probably not relevant to which is most accurate.
The other thing to keep in mind is that the End  
of Earth is not synonymous with the End of 
Humanity. Humanity might venture off to other  
worlds and burn Earth to ashes with our rocket 
flames, metaphorically or literally. So too,  
a virus might wipe out every human, 
or an artificial intelligence might,  
while leaving Earth otherwise untouched.
For today though we will speak to both options,  
end of Earth and End of Humanity, and at times use 
them interchangeably, though planet or biosphere  
wrecking events are our main focus. Indeed 
we can have multiple endings in this context,  
as a planet whose biosphere was obliterated to 
the point only a few bacteria remained might be  
fully rejuvenated in a billion years, just in 
time for the oceans to boil off into space. 
 
We’ve got nuclear war and Nuclear Winter to 
consider, Global Warming and Global Cooling.  
We have Grey Goo, Planetary Disassembly for 
building materials, planetary self-sentience,  
consumption by a black hole in our core or 
freezing if a black hole got in our Sun’s core  
or a black hole or some other large body perturbed 
Earth’s orbit and ejected us from the solar  
system. We’ve got a warming sun boiling off our 
oceans and atmosphere in a billion years or so,  
or an expanding sun swallowing our planet in a 
few billion more. We’ve got collisions with other  
planets or even our own moon dropping on us, in 
a reverse version of the event we think scattered  
the debris that our Moon eventually formed from. 
We have artificial scenarios to extend us past  
these, like re-terraforming our planet if we 
sterilized it with nukes, warming or cooling  
it with solar mirrors and shades, if it boiled or 
froze, moving it away from our Sun if we needed  
to, as the Sun aged, or refueling or filtering our 
Sun to extend its own life, or after life if we  
were huddling around the dying embers of a white 
dwarf once our Sun truly runs out of fuel. 
 
We are mostly going to skim the topics of 
Global Warming or Cooling from short term  
or human-sources in terms of carbon dioxide 
from factories or some volcano spewing ash out  
to block sunlight. There’s tons of things that 
can alter the atmosphere’s ability to absorb,  
reflect, or store sunlight and heat 
energy, natural and artificial,  
so even ignoring our current CO2 dilemma, we are 
going to need to have plans and strategies for  
managing planetary temperature in the long term. 
Even if we could convert to carbon neutral  
tomorrow, it won’t eliminates scenarios 
like volcanos, a comet or asteroid strike,  
natural solar cycles, or even warming from 
a nice clean and renewable power source like  
fusion resulting in so much energy abundance 
and economic growth that we had to make cooling  
mechanisms just to handle all the waste heat from 
the electricity being used by a trillion folks  
living in environmentally sound Arcologies. 
Some folks might argue that the natural ones  
like solar cycles or volcanoes need 
not concern us since they are natural,  
but personally I don’t care if they are artificial 
or natural. Natural doesn’t impress me, natural is  
folks sitting in trees sticking berries up their 
noses and dying of random infections and plagues,  
and natural is getting your civilization 
wiped out by a tsunami or hurricane.  
 
So at some point we want to learn to manage 
the sunlight hitting our planet to curb  
warming or cooling and to start controlling 
our weather to mitigate hurricanes and such.  
The easiest way to do that is with solar shades 
and mirrors, presumably sourced from the Moon or  
Near Earth Asteroids and placed either in Orbit of 
Earth or at our L-1 Lagrange Point with the Sun,  
a spot about 1.5 million kilometers from Earth 
toward the Sun, about 1% of the distance.
 
We’ve talked about this method many times, see 
our Power Satellites episode for how to do this  
and hopefully make a profit in the process, but in 
summary, the planet’s temperature mostly depends  
on how much sunlight hits it, either reflecting or 
absorbing, and how long that heat gets retained.  
Move the planet further or closer to the Sun – 
something we’ll discuss later today – and it will  
cool or warm respectively. But we can mimic that 
by having thin shiny plates either bounce some  
additional sunlight down to Earth or to bounce 
some away. We also potentially have the option of  
using very thin and large reflective balloons that 
floated up high enough to keep most sunlight out,  
if we find that orbital mirrors are more difficult 
to build and maintain than currently expected,  
and such balloons might have some other advantages 
to be used in tandem with orbital mirrors. 
 
They are both conceptually simple, technologically 
simple too, but a pain because tons of giant  
mirrors can clutter your atmosphere and orbital 
space, requiring extra effort to navigate and  
keep it clear, and you also need to manufacture 
them and fly them up and repair or replace them,  
in the case of orbital mirrors. 
Hence we tend to like the idea of  
doing it from the Moon as there’s tons of 
aluminum on the Moon, which can be easily  
cooked and made into shiny aluminum foil and 
dragged into orbit. These mirrors will be our  
go-to for a lot of End of Earth prevention or 
delaying options so their basic function and  
creation bears repeating but see that episode 
on Power Satellites for a more detailed dive.
 
Ironically they are non-optimal for dealing with 
one type of climate change I didn’t mention,  
which is a Nuclear Winter. Any nuclear war is 
very likely to trash the orbital infrastructure  
of a planet, and a few million shredded 
solar mirrors each originally a kilometer  
wide is certainly not going to help the space 
debris issue. It’s not a big long term threat,  
a solar shade or mirror falling out of orbit on 
a planet wouldn’t even be a threat to those below  
if it somehow didn’t get shredded and burnt up 
in the descent, and they are easily replaced, but  
to have them help correct a hypothetical nuclear 
winter you’d either need them at your L-1 Lagrange  
point or need to replace the orbital ones which 
might be rather hard after a massive nuclear war,  
those are assumed to be rough on industries and 
economies. A nuclear winter is a catastrophe  
theorized to cause a planet to cool after an 
atomic war causes massive city and forest fires,  
injecting vast quantities of soot into the 
stratosphere, blocking much of the sunlight. 
 
The modeling that came up with the concept has 
been heavily criticized as flawed and simplistic,  
so there’s doubt if a nuclear war would 
cause one and if so to what degree,  
but I could easily imagine that if one did, our 
colonies on the Moon or Near Earth Asteroids might  
see a big power shift as they have the resources 
to be rebuilding that orbital infrastructure,  
clearing the debris of the Kessler Syndrome, and 
putting in new orbital mirrors or ones at L1.  
Additionally, another way we could get a 
Nuclear Winter in the future is all that orbital  
infrastructure getting blown to smithereens 
and causing a thick cloud of debris around the  
planet blocking light. Now we don’t have that 
many satellites up in modern times, but when  
we contemplate thousands of kilometer-wide solar 
collectors, or space stations or space habitats,  
that could cause an amount of debris large enough 
to significantly dim incoming sunlight levels.  
That would be temporary but potentially very bad 
while it was slowly dissipating and clearing,  
and ironically the fastest way to clear it would 
be to detonate more nukes in higher orbits.
 
So there’s a number of things which can cause 
a planet to cool and solar mirrors are probably  
your go to for fixing most of them, and solar 
shades for the reverse. Unnatural scenarios can  
include nuclear war or global warming but can also 
include Kessler Syndrome – which is when a bunch  
of high-speed orbital debris hits other orbiting 
objects, shredding them and causing more debris,  
which cascades to ruin everything up there. 
But that’s up there, not down below on Earth,  
so doesn’t concern us for this episode, as 
even the cooling effect of such a cloud of  
debris will be short term, at most decades, and 
civilization disrupting, not humanity ending. 
 
Of course that could cause a Snowball Earth 
Scenario, which is when the whole planet freezes  
over. The initial mechanism can vary but the idea 
is that Earth’s temperature isn’t just about how  
much light reaches the surface, but what happens 
when it gets there. If it hits a mirror that light  
leaves without doing much to warm things, 
while if it hits a black object it absorbs  
and warms things. Ice is quite reflective 
to light compared to water or most dirt,  
so the fear is that if a bit more of the planet 
got covered in ice, more light would reflect away  
without warming us as much, causing a little lower 
temperature, causing more ice to form and linger  
further from the poles, causing more cooling, and 
so on, cascading till the whole planet froze.
 
We suspect this may have happened to 
Earth before, possibly repeatedly.  
Now it is also likely to be temporary as a 
frozen surface wouldn’t really affect volcanoes  
but it would kill off most plant life. With 
volcanoes spewing carbon dioxide every year,  
and very little photosynthetic life to remove 
that carbon dioxide from the atmosphere,  
the greenhouse effect would grow stronger and 
stronger until it reached a tipping point,  
whereupon the ice would start to thaw and 
trigger the run away effect in reverse.  
So too you’re adding layers of ash and debris to 
the surface that are more absorptive to sunlight  
rather than reflective white ice, there’s no 
rain washing ash and soot away when it's frozen.
 
One alternative though, and which could happen 
at any time, is something which causes Earth to  
either get further from the sun or the Sun to 
get dimmer. Indeed the Sun is actually getting  
brighter with time but we could have weird 
scenarios like some planetoid hitting the Sun  
that caused its upper layers to darken for a 
period or a black hole meandering into the Sun,  
or a planet or star passing to nearby 
to cause Earth’s orbit to be disturbed,  
or even ejecting us into deep space. Indeed this 
sort of planetary ejection is quite common and  
we suspect interstellar space is littered with 
such ejected frozen rogue or nomad planets.
 
This is one way the Earth could die from 
Ice, and folks wonder how long life would  
last if the Sun shut off or we got moved from 
it. The answer is actually a very long time.  
First, if something did magically stop all fusion 
in our Sun’s core, unlike in some films or shows  
suggesting this would be rapid, years or 
even minutes, we wouldn’t notice a thing  
for many thousands of years. But a total shut 
off of the Sun or us ejected into deep space  
would still result in a long period of cooling.
To begin with, the Earth has around 4x10^30 Joules  
of Heat Energy in it, which is how much energy 
the Sun releases in about 3 hours. However,  
only about a two-billionth of the Sun’s light ever 
reaches Earth, so that is akin to around 600,000  
years worth of solar energy on Earth. We wouldn’t 
stay warm that long on the surface obviously,  
but if you’ve ever wondered why the Earth’s core 
is so hot, it’s a mixture of all the heat energy  
of its formation and all the nuclear decay of bits 
of uranium down there. That leaks out very slowly,  
at a rate of about 50 Terawatts for the whole 
planet, or a tenth of a watt per square meter,  
and this process of cooling slows over 
time, you lose heat more rapidly when hot,  
and more slowly as you cool. 
This is important as the Earth  
currently radiates around 5000 times more energy 
from its surface than is coming up from below,  
as geothermal heat, varying a bit by time of day 
and year and location. It penetrates very little.  
It would freeze pretty quickly, we anticipate 
the oceans freezing over in a mere two months,  
giving you that snowball Earth, but then as that 
layer of ice insulates you, the rate of cooling  
will slow even more. We’d expect liquid under 
those oceans for at least another thousand years,  
possibly much longer, and much would depend 
on if the Moon was still tidally heating us,  
which it would if the Sun went out but might 
not if we got ejected from the solar system,  
perturbations of that type can break satellites 
off their primary, so the Moon might spin away.
 
We can keep going even after that, in 
underground caverns powered by nuclear reactors.  
The surface would be dark, and yet even as 
temperatures dropped to the point that you  
might even get to see oxygen and nitrogen 
raining down as liquids, a kilometer or two  
down would still probably be livable. In such a 
scenario you could keep retreating ever deeper,  
to the extent of your ability to reinforce 
and shore up tunnels – see our Subterranean  
Civilizations episode for discussion of that.
It also won’t cool completely, it would stop at  
the point that the surface was radiating heat 
at the same rate geothermal heat was working up  
from the deep, again around a tenth of a watt per 
square meter, or about 5000 times less than now,  
and blackbody emission of light from hot objects 
– or cold ones – goes up with the fourth power of  
temperature. Unfortunately that would be around 
8 Kelvin, considerably colder than even Pluto. 
 
But we have discussed plenty of ways to inhabit 
such frozen worlds before, and accomplishing  
them on Earth would be easier given that all 
our industry is already here. Realistically  
though you would have to work very hard to get 
as many nuclear power plants going as possible,  
and locating all your good uranium and thorium 
deposits, then hole up in caverns you further  
insulated like thermos bottles to provide warmth 
and artificial sunlight for flora and fauna.  
With sufficient technology and hard work, a 
civilization could thrive on such a world,  
so a Snowball Earth is probably not the End of 
Earth or Humanity even if it happened tomorrow.
 
As I mentioned though the planet 
would see the seas freeze over fast,  
and indeed lose its atmosphere as the oxygen and 
nitrogen in it cooled below their boiling point  
and rained down on the frozen world below 
as the Sun disappeared or darkened. 
 
Now let’s contemplate the possibility of the 
planet losing its seas and air as time goes  
on and the Sun brightens, not so much death by 
baking or asphyxiation given how slow it is,  
but rather Death by Dehydration.
The Sun grows brighter every year,  
though it is very slow and amounts to about 
a 10% to 25% increase in a billion years.  
Still that means in about a billion years the 
amount of light hitting Earth at any given moment  
will rise from the current average of 1361 Watts 
per square meter to about 1500 Watts per square  
meter, for a 10% increase, or 1700 for that 
higher 25% brightness increase estimate. That’s  
more than a trivial rise in illumination, 
and thus temperature, akin to moving Earth  
about 5 to 10 million miles or 8 to 15 million 
kilometers closer to the Sun. It also means a  
rise in certain nastier types of radiation.
How much Ultraviolet or UV light comes off a  
star for instance is a factor of both its total 
brightness and the temperature. Raising a star’s  
brightness by 10% doesn’t mean a 10% increase in 
harmful UV light, because the spectrum or color  
of any star peaks based on its temperature, so 
we see even more UV light as the spectral peak  
of the star shifts toward the blue and violet 
and ultraviolet. This is a blue shift of light,  
a cooling star incidentally would red 
shift, something we’ll discuss today too.
 
UV light doesn’t just give us suntans and 
sunburns, it contributes strongly to ionizing  
and stripping atmosphere off a planet. So too, a 
brighter hotter sun is one producing more solar  
wind, which also strips atmospheres off planets. 
There’s several mechanisms for atmospheric escape  
and most are exacerbated by hotter, 
brighter, and more blue-shifted light.  
So as our sun grows hotter and brighter we 
expect to see atmosphere depletion rise.  
As atmospheres deplete, the rate of 
depletion tends to snowball and accelerate. 
 
Now as air leaves, pressure drops, and the boiling 
point and evaporation point of water decreases  
with that. As a brief tangent into chemistry, 
liquids by and large cannot exist in a vacuum,  
just solids and gases, in many ways a liquid 
is just a gas being shoved together by external  
air pressure, and the range of temperature in 
which a material can exist as a liquid decreases  
as pressure drops. For instance water at 
normal earth air pressure exists between 0  
and 100 celsius or 32 and 212 Fahrenheit, 
but as pressure drops that range narrows,  
the boiling point going down and by about a tenth 
of normal pressure you will have about halved that  
boiling temperature to around 50 Celsius or 120 
Fahrenheit, by 1% of normal pressure its down to  
boiling at 7 Celsius or 45 Fahrenheit. The reverse 
is true too, higher pressure, higher boiling point  
and wider range of temperatures for liquid phases 
of materials. This is why we run steam engines  
and turbines under higher pressure, a higher 
boiling point makes for more efficient engines.
 
Now as the air pressure drops all that ocean 
beneath is going to start evaporating at lower  
temperatures or faster than normal, and that 
will not just raise humidity but should result  
in some of those water gas particles ionizing 
into hydrogen and oxygen and as a result,  
some oxygen loss. The hydrogen will be 
lost far faster than the oxygen to the  
forces that deplete atmospheres, so essentially 
you end up with ocean levels slowly dropping.  
Eventually your ocean disappears 
and the atmosphere soon follows.
 
The worst case scenario models I’ve seen put 
this at half a billion years ahead in our future,  
assuming that higher end increase in 
solar luminosity and worst scenarios  
for atmosphere and ocean loss, and others put 
it at nearly the red giant phase of our Sun,  
our next topic, but 1-2 billion years tends to be 
more in middle of estimates. We often see science  
fiction descriptions of stars going red giant and 
eating their worlds below, wiping out the last  
life and seas, but in truth both would have long 
since gone in even the most generous scenarios.
 
Now this is one of our easiest disaster and 
end world scenarios to manage and prevent,  
or at least delay. It has the three-pronged 
advantage of being far in the future, very  
slow but obvious in its occurrence, and requiring 
no advanced technology or mega-efforts to fix.  
When it comes to problems, low-tech and low effort 
solutions are nice, and problems you can’t ignore  
or debate, but take a long time to slowly occur, 
like coastal erosion, tends to be the safest bets  
for handling, people can’t stick their heads in 
the sand, but also have plenty of time to act. 
 
The easiest method is those Solar 
Shades we already discussed,  
you just slowly increase how many of them you 
have in orbit or at the L-1 Lagrange point.
 
Incidentally I mentioned coastal erosion as 
an analogy a moment ago but we will give it  
an honorable mention as a doomsday option. 
Tidal and tectonic activity are harder to  
model in terms of new land area being created 
and old land being eroded away but most of this  
planet is covered in water and the average 
depth of that water is a few kilometers,  
whereas much less of the planet is land and 
very little of it is over a kilometer up,  
so you could easily dump that land into 
the oceans more evenly, submerging it all,  
without making your seas shallow. Weather 
and tides slowly remove land back into the  
sea and we rely on tectonic plate collisions to 
make new volcanoes and mountain chains arise,  
to be weathered down into land masses. We 
shouldn’t assume that is eternal, especially  
on other planets which might not have giant 
moons or giant liquid metal cores and mantles. 
 
So I could see the opposite of our sun-brightening 
death-by-dehydration model, death by flood,  
or by slow erosion anyway. Needless to say this 
is easily corrected by a civilization with decent  
industry given how slow it is. Nor is it a threat 
to life existing on a planet. Or maybe it is. It  
is possible a planet that became nothing but ocean 
on its surface with no land for kilometers down  
might lose all its nutrients and marine snow 
with no sunlight anywhere near nutrients, and  
given that the scenario assumes lower tectonic and 
geothermal activity causing volcanoes and new land  
to stop appearing, even the meager life possible 
by deep sea thermal vents might shrink and halt.  
Ditto without a big moon a planet might lose the 
tidal effects that help with these processes,  
and our Moon is getting further away every day, 
and our own days longer. So death by the land  
drowning into the seas is a possibility, and more 
so on other planets perhaps, though given that  
the ocean would be slowly dissipating too, the 
Dehydration option is more likely by far I’d say.
 
Now the sun will keep smoothly growing a little 
brighter every year, but eventually that gradual  
brightening will give way to a faster and larger 
inflation into a sub-giant then a red giant,  
but even when those relative surges happen it will 
be pretty slow, and billions of years from now.  
That red giant may well swallow Earth, but even if 
it only got out to Venus, it would be implausible  
that we could simply add enough solar shades to 
Earth to keep it livable. We might be able to  
extend the Sun’s own lifetime, by starlifting 
material to reduce its mass, and prevent or at  
least delay the red giant phase followed by the 
white dwarf phase, which we’ll get to in a moment,  
but an alternative is to just move the Earth. 
Now we’ve discussed building spaceships the size  
of entire planets before, or bigger, and moving 
at interstellar speeds – see our Planet Ships and  
Fleet of Stars episodes for discussion of those 
titanic craft – so moving a planet at less than  
human walking speed away from the Sun to keep 
us cool as it brightens is not much of stretch  
of imagination compared to those. Indeed those 
same solar mirrors and shades we discussed before  
can be used in greater number, combined with 
gravity tractors or reflective patches on Earth or  
on space towers, to slowly shove the planet away 
using the Sun’s own light to power the process.
 
Indeed you might pack up the entire planet 
and move it to a new solar system whose sun  
is younger or had longer to live. And you might 
maintain our ecosystem by a long network of relays  
transmitting solar power from our own ever more 
distant star, or stars enroute to our new star,  
or you might use fusion. We mentioned the option 
for the planet dying by Snowball earth if we  
got ejected from the Sun, but that assumes a 
natural act and not a technological effort.  
Given the energy efforts involved, we’re not 
talking about a few thermos bottle civilizations  
buried kilometers below our frozen surface running 
on fission power plants. We might be considering a  
civilization running on nuclear fusion, in which 
case the hydrogen in our own ocean is more than  
sufficient to run civilizations for eons.
Indeed you could artificially light our  
planet as bright as the Sun and as long as the Sun 
normally would by hydrogen fusion of those oceans,  
much shorter if you could only do deuterium based 
fusion, which makes up only about 1 out of every  
5000 hydrogen atoms in water, but still long 
enough for a planet to coast to another solar  
system in comfort and style. You can do vastly 
better with a black hole as we’ll discuss in a  
bit, but if you need to flee your own dying 
sun, with decent technology and forewarning,  
you can make the trip. You could later 
return to our Sun after its red giant phase,  
or have just moved into the Oort Cloud for it, and 
bring Earth back to where it was, and ever closer,  
as the Sun became a white dwarf and began cooling. 
And through use of mirrors you could keep Earth  
habitable around that cooling remnant for a very 
long time. But white dwarfs themselves are out of  
fuel and are simply very hot and massive and cool 
very slowly even compared to planets, but they are  
out of fuel and are cooling, so living around 
one eventually results in a Death by freezing.
 
Of course you might be able to refuel your 
sun or extend its own life, and we discussed  
the process for that in our episode Starlifting, 
where by means magnetic and thermal you blow gas  
off your Sun, pull out the elements heavier than 
hydrogen – which include metals and key atoms for  
organic life, and thousands of times more 
than Earth has. You then drop the hydrogen  
back in if you like, or keep it for other 
uses. Either method extends the Sun's life,  
which stirs and mixes its contents like a boiling 
pot, but slowly concentrates helium in the core,  
poisoning regular star burning of hydrogen 
long before it runs out of hydrogen.  
Indeed we estimate our Sun would only burn 
about 10% of its hydrogen fuel before dying. 
 
By removing the helium, and heavier elements, we 
prevent this early natural death. What’s more,  
as a star mass decreases, whether by removing 
just those heavier elements or also the hydrogen,  
it burns slower and dimmer. As we’ve noted, 
the Earth only gets about a two-billionth  
of the Sun’s emitted light, so we could 
dim our Sun a lot by lowering its mass,  
extending its lifespan, and either move Earth 
closer or just add a lot of solar mirrors. 
 
It is also possible to take gas and fuel 
from other stars to bring it to our sun,  
removing spent fuel and adding fresh hydrogen. 
Indeed most of the hydrogen in our galaxy is  
floating around in clouds, not other stars, but 
it's nicely concentrated in those stars which also  
provide the power to disassemble them and hurl 
giant pods of hydrogen back to our solar system.  
In this way you could extend our Sun’s 
lifetime for untold trillions of years. 
 
On the topic of disassembly though, we probably 
need to acknowledge that billions of years is a  
long time to assume a status quo on Earth, 
and civilizations disassembling other stars,  
or other planets to help build giant stellar 
engines like those used for Starlifitng, might  
not consider Earth exempt from that. Or they might 
place special value on Earth but find it easier  
to disassemble it, or its biosphere, for full 
transport to another solar system, like moving a  
house Brick by Brick. Earth may end simply because 
it's seen as more valuable for its raw materials,  
to humanity or to an alien invader or some 
post human replacement for us like artificial  
intelligence. That could happen a billion years 
from now or even in just a few millennia.
 
Of course the end of the world might be an 
accident too and even potentially in this century,  
and from something artificial but not 
intelligent. We often imagine inventing  
self-replicating machines and them running 
amok, disassembling everything to make more of  
themselves, and we call this a Grey Goo scenario.
Grey Goo is one way a world might be disassembled,  
either an accident running away on us or an 
intentional effort to disassemble the world  
for raw materials, but ironically grey goo in 
its natural and runaway state might not be an  
Earth-ender, just an Earth changer. We often 
compare grey goo to early life, green goo,  
as basic microbes are essentially self-replicating 
machines. We might expect grey goo to evolve  
more complexity with time too, as green 
goo apparently did, even to the point  
of sentient and sapient lifeforms. However 
the whole planet was not really green gooed,  
only a very thin film on its surface was. And this 
is potentially true for gray goo too. Consider,  
we contemplate runaway self-replicating machines 
turning the whole planet into more of themselves  
but how could the lower layers do this? There’s 
no place for them to absorb sunlight to power  
themselves for instance when buried 
under kilometers of their cousins. 
 
Presumably regardless of their power 
source they should seek to be on top  
getting sunlight for free energy and open 
air or space for easier cooling. So too,  
what sort of machine could really operate when 
buried under kilometers of other tiny machines?  
Surely they would be crushed and grow hot, just 
like our own magma. So grey goo would not get  
the whole planet, and indeed we likely would see 
slow mutation into many species as some specialize  
in focusing on getting to the surface while others 
learn to cannibalize and eat their damaged cousins  
slowly sinking through the sea of each other to 
the magma layer below. One can easily imagine much  
speciation and variations of our own ecosystems 
including the marine snow of organic debris in  
our own oceans feeding the sunless ecosystem 
deep down below. Here though its cannibals in  
a sea of metal and silicon floating on a raft 
of wrecked and compressed predecessors itself  
floating on the magma, occasionally perturbed or 
volcanoed to higher levels to refresh things. 
 
Nor would they be cannibals for long as they 
diverged much as early life did here. So in truth,  
grey goo would only replace the green goo layer on 
Earth, and probably just spawn a new era of life.
 
If you want to eat even the planet’s core, 
truly obliterate Earth, then your better bet  
might be a black hole, and these are amazing power 
source civilizations will likely seek to master,  
a hundred times better than even nuclear fusion, 
but often perceived as dangerous. However, as we  
saw in our episode Weaponizing Black Holes, while 
they are dangerous it really takes a precision and  
deliberate effort to destroy a planet with 
one, or better yet a pair of them, and one  
accidentally escaped from groundside power plants 
would probably need millions of years to eat  
Earth if they ever could. Plus you can actually 
capture and remove one with sufficient effort.  
They really would not sink to the core 
of a planet till it was far too late to  
care, instead bouncing around inside a 
world. See that episode for the details.
 
But Black Holes offer us one option for long term 
survival that our Sun’s natural fate does not.  
First, as probably the best power source in 
known physics, you can slowly dump matter  
into them to produce power. Every kilogram of 
mass has the same fundamental energy in it,  
E=mc², and you can get somewhere between a 
fifth to half of that energy out of a black hole  
by dropping it into one, and the rest as very 
slowly released Hawking radiation long after.  
Any kind of matter works equally well, 
including your garbage or hazardous materials,  
or abundant hydrogen and helium, 
or potentially even dark matter.
 
We’ve mentioned losing Earth’s ocean to 
evaporation, and they mass about a billion,  
billion tons. That represents a mass-energy 
of about 10^38 joules or 100 million, billion,  
billion, billion joules, which is about 10,000 
years of light production for the whole Sun,  
or 20 trillion years worth of sunlight for 
the entirety of Earth, which again only gets  
about a two-billionth of the Sun’s released 
total sunlight. That’s a very long time,  
and you could be feeding in mountains instead of 
water. Earth itself masses more than a thousand  
times what our oceans do, meaning you could 
drip feed the whole planet into black holes  
to run it for quadrillions of years, long 
after every star in the Universe had died. 
 
You might run power off one for Earth from stores 
of other matter too. Jupiter is around 300 times  
more massive than Earth and the Sun a thousand 
times more massive than Jupiter. And the galaxy a  
trillion times more massive than that, if you want 
to raid other solar systems for fuel. Including  
dead sources, there’s no reason you can’t 
feed even dying white dwarfs into black holes,  
though this is rather tricky without setting off 
a supernova and far harder with a neutron star,  
which are even denser and require even 
more energy to starlift material off of,  
though carefully skimming the surface off one 
with a black hole is one possible approach,  
albeit one requiring amazing precision 
to avoid catastrophic explosions.
 
So when it comes to the End of the 
Earth, it might be a long way off indeed,  
not thousands of years or even a few 
billion, but a billion-billion years or more.  
Yet will it be by fire or ice? One might 
think in a universe slowly cooling off  
and run on scraps of power from black holes that 
it would be ice, but our current theory say black  
holes do evaporate over time, and give off energy 
faster and faster as they get smaller and smaller,  
releasing ever more Hawking radiation ever more 
quickly, till growing to be miniature suns. In the  
end, if true, and if you can survive long enough 
to tap dying black holes for this sort of power,  
your ending isn’t in darkness and ice, but a 
swelling period of ever brighter millennia and  
centuries ending in an explosive surge. You would 
be consumed by fire, if you chose to remain close,  
but given that there would be nothing left to live 
on, except maybe iron stars countless eons beyond,  
there would seem little reason to escape the fire 
and freeze in the cold endless night beyond.
 
So civilizations would get to pick, fire or ice, 
as they so desired, but it’s a choice they need  
not make till a future so far ahead in time it 
makes a billion years seem like an eyeblink.
 
Today we are celebrating our 300th Thursday 
episode and we will get to discussing that  
and our upcoming schedule in just a moment, 
but first: A common problem that comes up on  
this show and other sciences shows 
is always how much math to put in,  
because it really is often very fundamental 
to understanding and mastering concepts,  
and yet lots of folks are not comfortable 
with math. I try to minimize how much we  
put on the screen because simply explaining math 
doesn't help much. You have to practice with it  
in a hands-on fashion, and that’s something our 
friends at Brilliant focus on: Interactivity.
 
Over the last year, Brilliant has built a 
whole new platform for their courses that  
takes interactivity to the next level. 
Pre-Algebra, Mathematical Fundamentals,  
and Algorithm Fundamentals are the first 
courses launched on this platform.
 
Brilliant is a website and app built off this 
principle of Interactivity: you learn best while  
doing and solving in real-time, not by long 
lectures or memorising formulas and facts.  
With Brilliant you can jump right into solving 
problems and be coached bit-by-bit until,  
before you even realize it, you've learned a 
new subject in STEM. And if you do get stuck  
or make a mistake you can read the explanations 
to find out more and learn at your own pace.
 
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether 
you want to start at the basics of math,  
science, and computer science, or try any 
of their many excellent daily challenges,  
and if you'd like to join me and a community 
of 8 million learners and educators today,  
click the link in the episode description down 
below or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
 
So as mentioned earlier, this is episode 
300 and as I’ve explained in the past,  
that is a somewhat debatable number because we 
didn’t start doing weekly episodes until about our  
20th, and the formal numbering system has actually 
become the production week these days, so that 300  
does not include any of the bonus episodes we’ve 
done, which when combined with livestreams and  
two-part collaborations, puts us at nearly 400 
episodes, not 300. Amusingly it’s 357 weeks since  
the very first episode and this episode comes out 
exactly 2500 days after the original episode came  
out, which somehow seems the better benchmark. 
Nonetheless since we started doing them weekly,  
we have never missed a single Thursday release, 
not one week, not even on my honeymoon.
 
I occasionally think about resetting the 
numbering in some fashion but the problem is  
my own calendar of personal tasks and even my 
journal uses this numbering these days, which is  
pretty indicative of how much this show has grown 
over the years from a casual experiment to a major  
hobby to a full-time-plus profession, and it’s a 
great chance to once again thank all the folks who  
have helped the show grow. Every volunteer whose 
helped with script editing or making animations or  
moderating our social media forums. Every patreon 
and nebula subscriber, paypal or snailmail donor,  
superchatter in the livestream, and our sponsors. 
And every person whose watched episodes and  
shared them with others, hit that like button, 
left a comment, and subscribed to the show. 
 
Without you, this show wouldn’t be possible 
and I cannot thank you enough. I’ve also gotten  
married since our last benchmark of 200 episodes, 
which came out about the time Sarah and I started  
dating, and I also can’t thank her enough for 
her help on the show, including co-hosting our  
monthly livestream, and putting up with the long 
hours I spend writing and producing episodes.
 
So thanks again to everyone and here’s 
to 300 more episodes, 2500 more days  
of production, and one more great week.
Speaking of Livestreams, we will be having one  
this weekend on Sunday July 25th at 4 pm Eastern 
Time. Then we will close the month out with the  
third episode of our Galactic Domination series, 
the Galactic Laboratory. That will takes us into  
August, which we’ll begin with a look at whether 
or not it's time for us to Embrace Nuclear Power,  
and the week after we’ll look at what the 
next space station after the ISS will be,  
before we have our mid-month Scifi Sunday episode: 
Alien Artifacts & Xenoarcheology, on August 15th.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future episodes, 
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,  
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked 
in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us iTunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
