This Episode is sponsored by Brilliant
Black Holes are amongst the most dangerous
and destructive things in the Universe.
So
let’s go live on one!
So today we return to Outward Bound series
to look at Colonizing Black Holes.
We talk fairly often on this channel about
advanced civilizations using black holes in
various ways. But we’re usually talking
either about artificial micro-back holes that
emit Hawking Radiation and need to be fed
constantly so they don’t disappear, or about
civilizations so far forward in time that
black holes would be prevalent, while what
we call “stars” would be ancient history,
part of a brief bright era when the universe
was still settling down from the Big Bang.
But today, we are going to talk about how
and why black holes might become the preferred
places for much nearer-future civilizations
to colonize, even while stars still burn and
uninhabited planets are abundant. In a lot
of science fiction, a ship stumbling across
a black hole is cause for panic, but in reality
the crew would probably be popping corks on
the champagne, because that’s some very
valuable real estate they just found!
To understand why, let’s talk briefly about
what our descendants would be looking for
in a place to colonize. Stars are useful fundamentally
as power sources. Earth is basically self-sufficient,
except for the light we receive from the sun,
which keeps our planet comfortably warm and
powers our entire ecosystem. But that power
doesn’t originate on the surface of the
sun that we can see. That goes on deep down
inside, where fusion turns hydrogen into helium
and produces lots of lethal gamma rays. Those
get absorbed and re-radiated as lower energy
longer wavelength photons many times by the
layers above, until that energy is eventually
emitted at the surface—mostly as visible
light and infrared in the case of our Sun.
Many of our colonization methods rely on collecting
that light, and we’ve discussed lots of
ways to concentrate or diffuse that light,
to let us settle at distances of our choosing
from the star. Other colonization plans involve
replicating sunlight in our habitats using
other energy sources. Fusing hydrogen into
helium produces millions of times more energy
than any chemical process does, but controlled
contained fusion is still something that eludes
us.
We do achieve fusion in hydrogen bombs, which
are often compared to the sun, but current
hydrogen bombs require rare isotopes like
deuterium, tritium, or lithium deuteride,
the ones that are easiest to fuse. So a nice
reactor you can dump common hydrogen into
and get electricity from is quite a ways off—and
it would still only release less than one
percent of the energy available in matter,
Einstein’s E=mc².
Black holes are much easier and more efficient.
There are several ways to get power from a
black hole, and which one you’d use depends
on your level of technology and the size of
the black hole. You can check out our video
about Black Hole Ships from a few weeks back
if you’d like to learn more about those
methods. But for black holes of the size we’re
discussing today, the size you would colonize,
the easiest method is to simply drop matter
in and collect the x-ray radiation pouring
from the accretion disk.
Matter in the accretion disk is compressed
with such force and moving so fast that friction
produces immense heat, which for an average
natural-size black hole would be radiated
in the x-ray part of the spectrum. This is
what we believe powers quasars. So a scaled-down
version of the brightest objects in the Universe
would be the power plant of your colony.
Black holes also have potentially enormous
value for industrial uses besides just being
a great power source. They are the perfect
way to dispose of anything you don’t feel
is safe or economical to recycle or otherwise
safely dispose of, as a black hole doesn’t
care what kind of matter you feed it, just
the amount. People often talk about dumping
radioactive waste into the sun, which is not
a great idea for reasons we’ll save for
another day, but in a black hole’s case,
it’s actually a highly profitable way to
dispose of dangerous material.
As we discussed in Black Hole Ships a few
weeks back, these objects are also handy for
space travelers because they allow a way to
change directions with minimum fuel. You can
fly close to any massive body to alter your
course or give yourself a little speed boost,
but the sharper the turn you want to make,
the closer the pass you’ll have to make--which
might be too close to the heat of a star if
not inside the star itself.
And contrary to what’s depicted in most
sci-fi, you can fly closer to a black hole
than you can to a star of equal mass because
it’s much cooler and doesn’t have all
that pesky stellar atmosphere and solar wind
that you’d rather not encounter at high
speed.
Though I’ll note that black holes are not
the only dead stars handy for space travel.
When a star starts dying it usually spends
a fair amount of time as a red giant, and
those are actually so thin you could run a
ship through their atmosphere as a means of
slowing down. Not our topic for today, but
since slowing a ship down is one of the biggest
issues with interstellar travel, these offer
a partial solution.
You can push on ships with lasers to accelerate
them, but there will be no laser to slow you
back down at an undeveloped destination, so
that constrains how fast you can travel to
uncolonized systems. Any fuel you have to
save for deceleration at the end can’t be
used for acceleration along the way. Red giants
might be ideal vanguard systems for colonization
because you reach them at higher speeds than
other, neighboring systems, letting you set
up as the first port of call for that region
of the galaxy.
In this same way, black holes make good waypoints
for distance places, as you can head in their
direction and use them to alter your course
and boost your speed, and they can be used
to slow down too. Indeed, one you can see
a long way off is likely jetting relativistic
matter off its poles and you might be able
to use conventional sails or magnetic sails
to use that for braking drag or an added boost.
So such places might naturally tend to be
the first distant places we visit and settle.
And once you’ve colonized it, assuming you’ve
got some raw materials nearby, which is quite
likely as even the supernova that produced
it would have been powerful enough to destroy
the original outer planets it probably had,
you’ve got a giant power plant on hand and
raw materials to feed it and build with.
Initially you wouldn’t want to live too
close, though again not for fear of gravity.
The method you’re likely to use for power
generation is to throw matter around a black
hole to form an accretion disc, which emits
huge amounts of X-ray radiation. So if you
want to be close you’ll have to wrap that
thing in radiation shielding and to prevent
any large chunks of matter falling in and
producing big blasts of X-rays.
Of course if you’re building a shield, you
might want to throw some dirt on top of it.
Dirt’s good radiation shielding too, and
we can add air and water and artificial lighting
and presto, new planet. Except it’s kind
of huge one. Your typical stellar mass black
hole is a million or more times as massive
as Earth, so if you build a shell around it
for normal Earth-gravity, it would be a shell
a thousand times wider than Earth and a million
times larger in surface area, a true Mega-Earth.
I should note it would also have an escape
velocity 32 times higher than Earth’s, 354
km/s instead of 11.2 km/s. The gravity well
is bigger and deeper, for all that the force
on you is the same as on the surface of Earth.
Easy to visit, but hard to leave, making it
quite the tourist trap.
Now the means for doing this shell is one
we’ve discussed many times on this channel
and that’s the orbital ring. Our episode
on Colonizing the Sun gives a full discussion
of how to do that around a massive object,
but basically, by creating a hollow hoop of
matter that does not orbit the planet or star
or black hole beneath it, but merely wraps
around it, then spinning another hoop or a
stream of matter inside it at faster than
normal orbital speed, we get a big stationary
ring we could walk around on. We could make
many of them, cocooning that object with a
mesh and then presto, shell world!
In this case you’d probably have a lower
shell from which to dump matter into the black
hole and absorb the radiation to make power.
You might have several habitable upper layers
too. Such planets have to be very big because
black holes are as massive as large stars,
and since gravity increases with mass and
falls off with distance, and you have to be
a lot farther from a black hole than from
the Earth’s center for the gravity to be
walkable.
Black holes often gain mass or even merge
with other black holes, as we often find black
hole candidate stars, supergiants, growing
up together in big clusters. So there are
going to be some very large ones of hundreds
of even thousands of solar masses. Shells
around them work just fine too, but they get
even harder to leave, even though the gravity
on that shell is presumably the same as Earth’s
surface, the escape velocity will keep rising.
As you probably know, time slows down in bigger
gravity wells and this slowing can be approximated
as the same as the escape velocity in terms
of the classic special relativity effect of
time slowing on a fast spaceship, at least
when you’re not too close to the event horizon.
So a shell that had an escape velocity of
1% of light speed has the time running slower
on it basically the same as a spaceship traveling
at that speed.
Which in truth is very little, your clock
would only lose about 4 seconds a day, or
about 26 minutes a year, and would require
a mass of several thousand solar masses. Such
black holes are not very common, though considerably
larger ones reside at the cores of most galaxies.
On our first example, the simple Mega-Earth
built around a black hole of a few solar masses,
with an escape velocity of merely 354 km/s,
time would only be running about 22 seconds
slow per year.
But for those big galactic core black holes,
often running into the millions of solar masses,
a shell around those, what we call a Birch
Planet, running a trillion times the mass
and surface area of Earth, would have an escape
velocity a thousand time that of Earth, about
4% of light speed, and you’re losing over
a minute every day. Still not a lot, but such
an object is so huge that its tidal forces
are tiny even where the gravity is high, so
an object placed at 100 times the Earth’s
gravity, a tenth as far from the center as
the planet-shell, would actually be losing
a few days a year.
This can go way higher though, as black holes
can be made much bigger. That monster at our
galactic core of a few million solar masses
is not even a percent of a percent of our
galaxy’s mass. It will only grow with time
too. One which had swallowed up most of its
galaxy’s mass would be having an escape
velocity around half the speed of light and
time running a good deal slower, and at this
point the spaghettification effect on matter
near the event horizon is practically none.
Those willing to experience higher gravity
would experience much slower time.
It also means you could drop down into that
black hole without being killed in the process,
indeed you could do this on a much smaller
one too. We don’t know what goes on down
inside them but the various options in this
or that theory would include some that might
make this a good idea, assuming you had no
desire to return to the universe outside,
which might indeed be the case by the time
monster-sized black holes like this were the
norm, as the Universe would be petering out
by then.
On these very large ones though, where you
are likely including multiple layers of shells,
time would be running significantly faster
or slower depending on which layer you resided,
and would be much more extreme if you were
in the higher gravity areas, if for instance
your biology was adapted to a few gees or
if you were post-biological and could endure
hundreds or even thousands of gees.
We’ve explored those possibilities quite
a bit in our Civilizations at the End of Time
series, but for this episode, let’s get
back closer to the here and now.
A question arises as to where you’d get
these black holes from. It’s worth keeping
in mind that black holes aren’t terribly
common. Only around 1 in 1000 stars that forms
is massive enough to become a black hole,
but that still means we ought to have at least
100 million of them in our galaxy now, with
of course a super-massive one in the center,
30,000 light years away. The closest one we
know of, V616 Monocerotis, is about 3000 light
years away, with the famous Cygnus X-1 being
the second closest at 6000 light years away.
But these are probably not be the closest,
only the closest known. While stars are not
randomly placed by type, we have many stars
massive enough to form a black hole closer
than either of those, and those are just living
ones. Remember we said 1 in 1000 that forms
is big enough to die a black hole, but such
stars live short lives, hence their rarity
among our neighbors, they form and die after
just a few million years, as opposed to their
black hole remnants, which will live on for
the next best thing to eternity.
Although talking about these stars living
briefly and dying as black holes, given the
huge value of black holes, and other ‘dead
stars’ for that matter, seems an increasingly
flawed definition. Even the name, black hole,
contains two words that are both so pessimistic…
and also both incorrect. It’s like calling
an island a dead volcanic eruption, technically
true but a weird and short-sighted way to
regard a potentially lush tropical isle that’s
far more amenable to being colonized than
a typical erupting volcano.
Anyway, by default we’d expect there to
be hundreds of black holes for every massive
enough star we can see alive now, though of
course quite a few might have merged with
siblings into more massive black holes by
now or been ejected from the galaxy.
That said, while the nearest we can see right
now is 3000 light years away, there’s a
couple hundred million stars in that volume,
so there’s presumably a couple hundred thousand
black holes in that volume too. Probably somewhat
fewer due to mergers, ejections, and the galaxy’s
supergiants not really being evenly distributed.
There’s around 15,000 stars within just
a hundred light years of us, our targets for
a nominal first wave of interstellar colonization,
and it would be a bit surprising if there
wasn’t at least one black hole in that region.
Black holes are obviously hard to see, since
they are only detectable by either wobbling
their binary companion if they have one or
if they are sporting a significant accretion
disc of matter falling into them and giving
off huge amounts of radiation. They wouldn’t
sneak up on you though, they’re hard to
see hundreds of light years away, same as
planets, but you’d know one was there, from
its gravitational effects, long before you
were close enough to be in any real danger.
While we might be colonizing black holes in
our stellar neighborhood in just a thousand
years or so, it’s quite likely we’ll be
using them for colonization a lot sooner.
We’ve discussed some ways of making black
holes in the black hole ships episode, and
some require no particularly advanced technology,
just a lot of infrastructure, which a growing
interplanetary civilization a few centuries
from now might have. Although the power requirements
are far larger for making bigger black holes,
the technical challenges are a lot smaller.
We’ve talked a lot about kugelblitz black
holes, ones of relatively low mass and short
lives that give off huge amounts of power
by Hawking Radiation, but it might turn out
we’re limited to making ones no less massive
initially than a fairly small asteroid. Of
course once they’re large enough you can
jam matter into them, there’s no longer
a power requirement for making them bigger,
quite the reverse, you’re generating huge
amounts of power while you do it.
If you effectively have a point-like object
of huge mass, and even one of Earth’s mass
is only the size of marble, you have a handy
source of artificial gravity. You could drill
a hole into Mars and drop one down of the
right mass, and suddenly have Earth-like gravity
on the surface. Mars is about half the diameter
of Earth and about 11% of Earth’s mass,
for that radius it would need about a 28%
of Earth’s mass for Earth-like gravity,
you’d presumably get that other 17% from
one of our gas giants or the Sun.
Transport would be no problem, since a black
hole you’re feeding matter into is as easily
adapted into a ship’s drive as a power plant,
as we discussed a few weeks back. Handily,
while the gravity is now Earth-like, the escape
velocity is still decently lower than Earth’s,
just 8km/s, and orbital speeds would only
be about 5 km/s, much handier for things like
spaceplanes, which we’ll be having an episode
on next week.
This trick works as well on Mercury or Venus
or Pluto or our own moon or any of the other
moons. Or for that matter small asteroids
or artificial spherical habitats. One might
argue it’s a bit mass wasteful but they
are good power generators and older ones used
as starship drives that had grown in mass
too much might get retired to serve as the
cores of micro-planets. We also only mostly
want hydrogen and helium, the overwhelming
majority of regular matter in this universe,
for power generation in suns or artificial
fusion reactors, but fusion power is redundant
if you’ve got artificial black holes that
are way more efficient.
In terms of size, for such things, you’ve
got limits for both the top and bottom but
it’s very broad. Go too big, and a shell
at normal Earth gravity would be dangerously
close to the event horizon, or even in it,
but that’s way up at galactic mass. Go too
small, and the black hole is emitting so much
Hawking radiation that normal gravity would
put you in a place too hot to live, but that’s
getting down to a planetary size parallel
to a modest backyard. If you’ve seen the
Rick and Morty episode where they go hide
on a microplanet they can walk around, yes
that is possible with this technique.
With one caveat, as mentioned, a black hole
dumped into Mars to give it Earth-normal gravity
still leaves it with a lower escape velocity,
still more than enough to hold an atmosphere,
which is mostly about creating a stronger
magnetosphere anyway, but that effect gets
bigger as we get smaller. If your micro-planet
only has an escape velocity about the same
as the root-mean square speed of room temperature
air, it’s all going to leak away very quickly.
So you’d still need to dome it over, which
arguably removes half the appeal such a planet
has over a classical rotating habitat where
there’s no natural sky.
Of course you could still have windows and
skylights and could walk around outside in
a space suit with normal gravity.
Now a planet isn’t going to keep its atmosphere
just because it’s escape velocity is higher
than the speed most air particles zip around
at, it will still leak fast it just won’t
blow off rapidly if you puncture the dome,
but if you’re curious, an asteroid about
a dozen kilometers wide, and about a millionth
Earth’s mass with its artificial black hole
in the basement, would have an escape velocity
of about Mach 1 and could probably get away
with fairly minimal airlocks for spaceports.
There’s some great examples of such worlds
in Alastair Reynolds’ Revenger series, where
the black holes in these worlds get called
Swallowers. Amusingly, most readers apparently
miss that all the spaceships traveling to
various other worlds in that book via light
sails are actually just roaming around a single
solar system in a partial Dyson Swarm, probably
unsurprisingly, most channel regulars here
did not miss that.
So you can fill all your moons and larger
asteroids up with such black holes and get
normal gravity, and grind the smaller asteroids
up to make artificial shells or regular cylinder
habitats. Very handy approach for mining an
asteroid too since you’ve got all the power
you need for running your mining and manufacturing
and launching.
That is still a lot of mass but again it’s
mostly hydrogen and helium which we can’t
build out of and which we wouldn’t need
for fusion. One big issue though, first, you
are still using that mass for power and once
it’s down in the black hole you’re not
getting it back unless you’re willing to
wait a long, long time, and longer the bigger
it is. Even a black hole with only a millionth
the Earth’s mass, itself barely bigger than
an atom, is going to live over a billion,
trillion times longer than our Universe is
old. Which is actually fine if you want to
be storing power for after the Sun goes out,
but is a long term investment to say the least,
and bigger ones live way, way longer.
We can cheat though, instead of using a single
one we can jam several into the same spot,
just far enough apart they don’t merge.
One of, say, a 120 megatons, would be coming
due about the time our Sun burned out, while
those you might want to use as a ship drive
might leak out in thousands or million of
years.
People often suggest the main currency of
the future would be matter or energy and micro
black holes make great long term bonds, since
you can store power in them as a perfect battery
for very, very long times with very, very
little leakage. Makes them a great way to
store your treasury, since a black hole is
harder to break into that Fort Knox… or
at least harder to break out from with your
loot. One problem though, especially for smaller
ones, is it’s going to be hard NOT to generate
power while you’re fattening them up.
You might wonder how that’s a problem, but
consider, if I am making black holes for the
space habitat market, and someone puts in
an order for a billion ton black hole to be
delivered next month, if even 1% of that feed
matter gets radiated away as energy while
I’m doing this, that’s a trillion, trillion
joules of energy released, enough to illuminate
Earth for an entire year, or power out current
global economy for 20,000 years. And you’d
need 6 trillion of those to make an Earth-sized
Shellworld or the equivalent land area of
many smaller micro-planets. That would also
represent the entire Sun’s output for a
few thousand years. I mean that’s exactly
why these are such ideal power plants.
Now, handy thing about a black hole is so
long as you’re aiming the feedstock right
down its gullet, there’s no energy splash,
no accretion disc, etc, and that’s viable
for one of modest size, and of course we can
always find a use for power. You can use it
for accelerating spaceships away or power
transmutation to turn one element you have
in abundance into another you want more of.
Getting rid of heat is an issue but you can
be doing this in the outer solar system, even
way out beyond the Kuiper Belt, where swarms
of such black hole factories would enjoy thousands
of times more radiating area than in the inner
system. And it’s also the ideal place for
running all your interstellar shipping and
colonization out from, since high speed collisions
are less of a concern far from your core civilization.
So I could easily imagine an inner solar system
with our classic planetary colonization and
asteroid and cylinder habitats slowly forming
a conventional Dyson Swarm where, far out
from the Sun, a growing black hole based economy
was sent out and receiving interstellar ships
and exporting black holes to the inner system
to slowly replace or augment the more standard
habitats and worlds there, each with little
black holes in their basement serving as either
a current power source or a long-term treasury
for the End of the Universe.
Of course, the outer solar system is a great
place to be putting a defense network for
your inner system, as we discussed in Colonizing
the Oort Cloud, and beyond supplying power
for such defense stations, black holes can
be terrifying weapons. But we’ll get to
that in a few weeks.
So we were talking about black holes and escape
velocity today and how you could use them
to alter your course or gain a speed boost.
There’s an excellent quiz on Black Holes
in Brilliant’s Astronomy course, and their
Astronomy quizzes are a great way to expand
your knowledge on that topic and get comfortable
working with a lot of the core concepts we
often build our discussions of our future
out in the galaxy off of.
Brilliant uses a mix of interactive visualizations
and illustrated and animated problems in short
quizzes to help you learn about topics like
that or how to slingshot a ship around a massive
body that a dry textbook or lecture just doesn’t
do as well, and it lets you do it at your
own pace from the comfort of your own home,
but also as part of a learning community that
you can talk with for help or discussion.
The most important part of learning is keeping
it fun and interesting, and they do great
job of that, from their interactive courses
to their daily challenges, which help to stimulate
your thinking and connect to expanded courses
if one of those problems grabs your interest.
Learning’s best done every day, and those
daily challenges are an excellent way to warm
up the brain and introduce you to exciting
new topics.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free. And also, the first
200 people that go to that link will get 20%
off the annual Premium subscription, so you
can solve all the daily challenges in the
archives and access every course.
So we’ll get to our upcoming schedule on
Youtube in just a moment, but first, we have
an upcoming bonus episode coming out that
won’t be on Youtube.
I’m not sure if I’ve mentioned it before
but a little over a year ago I was invited
to join a digital creator community called
Standard that had got founded by the creators
of Kurzgesagt and CGP Grey shortly before
that. It’s principally other educational
channels, and while we all love Youtube and
aren’t leaving it, their algorithm really
isn’t optimized with those kind of shows
in mind and it often limits what we can do
or try out so that Youtube’s algorithms
don’t bury our video, or our channel. So
we created Nebula, a streaming video platform
that we control, so we can use it to try new
things, explore new formats, and share more
behind the scenes content.
To honor that rolling out, tomorrow we’ll
be premiering a look at the Paperclip Maximizer,
the concept of a runaway artificial intelligence,
and an idea called Instrumental Convergence,
that even intelligences with very peculiar
goals, like making paperclips, will often
mimic goals and behaviors of creatures with
different goals, like survival.
Nebula is only five bucks a month, going to
the creators to fund new original content,
and to improve the service, which is brand
new. But you can watch that episode and others
from folks like Kurzgesagt and Real Engineering
for free, with a seven-day trial.
Visit watchnebula.com and get a free seven
day trial to check out the Paperclip Maximizer,
and stay tuned for all of the great stuff
we’re working on for you.
As mentioned, today’s episode is part of
short series on black holes that we started
a few week’s back with Black Hole Ships,
and we’ll be continuing that in three weeks
with Weaponizing Black Holes, and we’ll
look at some of the awesome and downright
terrifying ways these might be deployed in
the far future.
But next week we’ll be returning to the
Upward Bound series to look at Space Planes,
particularly the Skylon spacecraft, and ask
what technologies we’d need to let you take
of from your garage and fly straight to orbit,
or to the Moon or Mars, in your own personal
spaceship.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
We also have our monthly Livestream Q&A coming
up this weekend, Sunday May 26th, at 4pm Eastern
time, and I hope to see you then.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
